Our intentions pave the path toward our future selves. #Intentions can’t grow if we hold on to them. Only when we release our intentions into the depths of our #consciousness can they grow and flourish. #Reply: What are your intentions for the new year?

Depends on what you mean by "I"
"I" has ultimate freedom to make choices and "I" is nothing perceivable or material. Love.

The abstract infinite is the source of the concrete finite.

Depends on what you mean by “I“
“I“ is not body/ mind. It is what projects the virtual reality of body/ mind/ Universe as a movie!

Visceral interconnectedness suggests non dual awareness as fundamental reality.

The universe is my body.

Perfect understanding ! The physical world is a symbolic representation of perceptual activity!

From Human to #Metahuman : The cure for all suffering is the realization that you are not a person.

Epigenetics, neuroplasticity and now cardioplasricity! The body is a verb not a noun. You as conscious being can sculpt it with conscious choices.

Waking state, dream state. deep sleep state, soul consciousness, cosmic consciousness, divine consciousness, unity consciousness.

It matters that matter is non material. Matter is perceptual experience. Therefore consciousness can modulate our experience of it. Reality is different in different states of consciousness. So is the brain.

Humans  created the idea if markets God nation states, stars galaxies force fields atoms and molecules, money, democracies, etc. I think we need another debate with your friend RichardDawkins the apostle of #scientism and naive realism.

We have the same nervous system and agree on our constructs --Latitude, Longitude, Greenwich Mean Time, Money, Wall Street, Nation states, Atoms, galaxies are human constructs for modes of human observation, knowing & experience. We made them up!

I did not think of that! What do you say? 0 and 1 are the codes for universal digital language and perhaps represent infinite possibilities in mathematical space?

Atoms are human mental constructs. The wave function is a mental formulation predicting the appearance of particles upon measurement. Particles in turn are evanescent mental space time events in human consciousness. The universe is a human construct. #Metahuman 0=infinity=1

Every sentient being is the universe experiencing itself uniquely and in endless variations of itself. #Metahuman

There is no explanation for existence. In order to explain existence you have to first exist.

We do not experience a physical body or world. We experience a narrow bandwith of perceptual activity & construct the idea of a physical body and world. In reality their is neither body nor world. There is only consciousness knowing itself as perceptual and mental activity.

The everyday mind is the arena of consciousness.

We are all fictional characters in an insane collective dreamscape. Humanity is laying the ground for its extinction.

I'm thinking that the multiverse theory may indeed be true. We all live in a universe projected by the conditioned mind.

From Human to #Metahuman: In every act of perception and cognition you create the world.

“Everything in my life is the creation of #consciousness” Share this with a friend you would like to #meditate with.

From Human to #Metahuman: Matter is useful superstition for creating technology.  Reality is non-material.

Yes - true  ! However theories about reality are not “reality.”
Reality cannot be a system of thought including scientific thought. What is it the source of thought? Excluding consciousness as that which conceives theories makes for an incomplete understanding of reality.

Einstein was a naive realist. He was brilliant but believed in matter as ontological primitive as most scientists still do.

Naive Realism is the basis of current science. It’s great for creating technology but not for knowing fundamental reality. Self-Awareness without conceptual interference is key to all knowing.

Can you explain the mechanisms of imagination? Who / What imagines. How does consciousness modify itself into an image? Or a thought? No explanation of reality is complete without an explanation of the consciousness that is the knowing element in every theory or experiment.

There are infinite versions of you.

You are the eyes of the universe looking at itself.

You Are Thought-Free Lucid Presence Recycling and Evolving as Form and Phenomena.

Choiceless Awareness, subtle intention, synchronicity.

At all times the world is a projection of collective consciousness.
Science as we know it can't explain consciousness – but a revolution is coming.

To achieve a desireless state is also a desire! Desire is pure potentiality seeking manifestation. Form and formless are complementary.

Waking up to the transcendent ecstatic Self.

There is a place within you that is free from the wounds of the past and unburdened by fears for the #future. It is the source of your real #power – your true Self – and it is available here and now.

The desire for transformation is not only realistic but totally necessary.

A leap in identity from Personhood to Luminous Being.

This week we learned that every form and phenomena is one thing: pure awareness given a beginning, a middle and an end.

It's much better to be conscious than smart.

Faith is the certainty and knowing of the invisible Self without which there is no experience of the visible body or world.

Going beyond the illusion of space, time and causality.

You are formless being morphing into form and phenomena.

One seeks and seeks, but cannot find. One then gives up, and the answer comes by itself.

We are consciousness waving into matter.

The creative force of the cosmos is alive in us as us. The pulsing waves and breath of life is moving through us. God flows through Nature and through the the flute of our being.

Macrocosm v Microcosm is a false dichotomy.

Increased access to modes of conscious experience are the underlying commonality between traditional and technological approaches.

T3 Gratitude activates our values & theory of mind brain centers.

Inner exploration with rigorous examination is essential to our growth as a species!

You are the essence of existence.

Universe shock: The cosmos is alive and existing through human consciousness.

To be #Metahuman isn’t science fiction and is certainly not about being a superhero. Rather, it means to move past the limitation constructed by the mind and to enter a new state of awareness.

When we start to see ourselves as Metahumans, we'll start to see & experience ourselves as divine creators of the universe.

By exploring our being, we wake up and start moving beyond our present limitations to access a field of infinite possibilities.

Exchange your cleverness for bewilderment.

You can create and project any reality you want.  When you wake up to being #Metahuman, you will shift your identity from the scenery to the seer.

A vast majority of people are afraid of new, unknown things even though every creative idea or solution to a problem comes out of the new and unknown.

Body, Mind and Universe are a mirror of the conditioned Self.

Metahuman delves into the secrets on moving beyond the present limitations to access a field of infinite possibilities.

What we call "I" is not the body. There is no body. The body is an every changing activity. A process in consciousness.

It is possible to venture beyond daily living and experience heightened states of awareness. #Metahuman can help get you there.

Unleashing Your Infinite Potential - can map a direct path to a state of focused awareness and to self-regulation mechanisms.

You are an Infinite Being having a finite experience in the theater of space time and causality.

By going beyond, we can liberate ourselves from the conditioning and constructs that underlie anxiety, tension, and ego-driven demands.

It takes a whole book to unfold how liberating it is to change your worldview this radically, but I hope this taste will motivate you to consider how profound the mystery of you actually is.

To be #Metahuman means to move past the limitation constructed by the mind and to enter a new state of awareness in which we have deliberate and concrete access to peak experiences that can transform people’s lives from the inside out.

Once you wake up, your life becomes transformed, because pure consciousness — which is the field of all possibilities then dawns in your life. Only then does your infinite potential become your personal reality.

We are more than we think, more even than universe itself, because the universe is only one expression of the fundamental, grounding, metahuman source that emanates, nurtures & transcends us all.

To be fully conscious, you only need to be here now. Everything else is at the level of the problem.

Awareness knows itself as a unified changing recycling and evolving mind /body/ world experience. Mind body & universe are not containers of awareness but experiences in awareness.Awareness is formless, infinite non local & not bound, defined or limited by its finite expressions.

Existence and awareness of existence are synonymous.

Cause and effect are ideas based on finite experience. Transcendent reality as pore consciousness is formless and infinite, therefore beyond cause /effect. Both chicken and egg co exist as entangled possibilities eternally in timeless now.

Saturn is a name given by humans to a human experience. It’s proposed past existence is a human thought! The source of all knowing experience and thought is consciousness. You are objectifying a narrow band of  human perceptual activity as reality. #NaiveRealism

Timeless means outside time. Beginning and ending are concepts base in finite experiences. The source of all experiences experiences is infinite.

Pure awareness is the experience of transcendence!

You have to experience the Universe before you can claim anything about it. Replace the word “object“ with the word “experience” Who is having the experience? You discover #God as the Self! RudyTanzi RichardDawkins The Universe you see is a species specific human experience.

How do you prove an unobservable entity? Who/ what is the observer if nor consciousness? Earth is a concept for human perceptions and knowing. Sensations images feelings and thoughts! Even the denial of God is in consciousness.

Timeless means outside time. Beginning and ending are concepts base in finite experiences. The source of all experiences experiences is infinite.

In eastern Wishom traditions Pure Consciousness beyond the conditioned mind is the only #God there is. It is your own Self. Without Consciousness there can be no scientific inquiry. Ask yourself which came first #Consciousness or #Science?

A solution to the climate crisis needs action based on our spiritual relationship to the earth and its biosphere. The word "environment " implies separation. The planet is our extended body. The earth recycles through us, the oceans are our circulation, the is air our breath.

Be a #Metahuman: infinite flexibility is the secret of immortality. The timeless cannot be bound, compromised, or limited by its time bound experiences.

Matter does not matter! It’s a human concept for a particular mode of knowing and experience. Modes of knowing are infinite. Creativity is infinite. Civilizations evolve through the creative process.

Experience has no geographical location in space or time. Experience is not made out of any physical or subtle substance. The experiences of mind body and universe are mae out of formless awareness.

Actually enlightenment is bliss. Its a movement from all knowing to the source of all knowing -pure consciousness- infinite and without limitations. All knowledge is limited and therefore a form of ignorance. Wishing you joy and enlightenment.

A shift in identity from limited knowledge and experience to the source of all knowing and experience.

Yes our body and mind are not real. Only consciousness the source of all knowing and experience is real. We are that dimensionless Infinite Being.

For centuries the great artists, scientists, writers, and many ordinary people have gone beyond the everyday physical world. But if we could channel these open bewildering experiences, what would happen?

The only still point of the turning world is you. Until you discover your own center, a place immune to change, the world will be an out of control merry-go-round.

You Are the still point of the turning world, the dancer, the dancing and the dance.

The body is a verb not a noun. It can morph into numerous appearances!

Your Absolute Identity is Pure Consciousness that differentiates as Multiverses that are not locations in Space/ Time but frequency domains of states of consciousness.

Reversing biological age through the transcendence of time.

Fear is a powerful force, nowhere more so than when it comes to death and dying, but there is a way to dispel it once and for all.

We are the universe looking at itself through a human nervous system.

To know yourself you must inquire into that which you are not.

Increased access to modes of conscious experience are the underlying commonality between traditional and technological approaches.

Inner exploration with rigorous examination is essential to our growth as a species!

How did we become self aware in order to experience the universe we created?

When we expand awareness we change our experience of reality.

No matter how many thoughts you’ve had in your life, there are infinitely more you can think; no matter how many sentences writers have written, there are infinitely more to write.

Digestive or any other distress is an experience in consciousness. The experience cannot limit its source . You are not defined by any experience unless yo choose to. The awareness of an experience is intrinsically free of the experience

Consciousness is the knowing element in every experience. It is formless, infinite, without cause. It is the presence in which thoughts and perceptions arise and subside. It is timeless and it is the Real You!

Thoughts are human interpretations of human perceptual activity in non-local awareness.

The body is part of the illusion. It's a name given by humans for a ceaselessly changing perceptual activity in awareness. There is no such "thing" as a body. Its a verb not a noun.

You are the most significant being in the world because, at the soul, you are the world.

Listen with intent and with patience to the voice within. To the quiet voice that speaks softly in the deepest part of your being. This is the soul, the seed of potential. This is where we connect most fully with the universe. With ourselves. #consciousness #meditation

Right-side up is also upside down.  Perspective is local and consciousness non-local.

Mind, Brain, Body and World Experiences Are Symbolic Representations of Evolving Souls

In a non-local universe there is nowhere to be lost. Reality is not what we think but the source of all thinking. Thinking is the mistake of the intellect that creates subject/object split. This statement is a thought as well. God’s language is silence Knowing without thinking.

Rationality justifies validity of perceptual experience. All thoughts are fundamentally misleading interpretations of bits of sensory experiences.

In order to be a cosmic alchemist you must begin by getting over the superstition of matter.
