   CRACKING THE CODING INTERVIEW

My Approach

The focus of Cracking the Coding Interview is #algorithm, coding, and design questions. Why? Because
while you can and will be asked behavioral questions, the answers will be as varied as your resume. Like-
wise, while many firms will ask so-called "trivia" questions (e.g., "What is a virtual function?"), the skills devel-
oped through practicing these questions are limited to very specific bits of knowledge. The book will briefly
touch on some of these questions to show you what they 're like, but I have chosen to allocate space to areas
where there's more to learn.

2  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                                         Introduction

My Passion
Teaching is my passion. I love helping people understand new concepts and giving them tools to help them
excel in their passions.
My first official experience teaching was in college at the University of Pennsylvania, when I became a
teaching assistant for an undergraduate computer science course during my second year. I went on to TA
for several other courses, and I eventually launched my own computer science course there, focused on
hands-on skills.
As an engineer at Google, training and mentoring new engineers were some of the things I enjoyed most. I
even used my "20% time"to teach two computer science courses at the University of Washington .
Now, years later, I continue to teach computer science concepts, but this time with the goal of preparing
engineers at startups for their acquisition interviews. I've seen their mistakes and struggles, and I've devel-
oped techniques and strategies to help them combat those very issues.
Cracking the Coding Interview, Cracking the PM Interview, Cracking the Tech Career, and CareerCup
reflect my passion for teaching. Even now, you can often find me "hanging out" at CareerCup.com, helping
users who stop by for assistance.
Join us.
Gayle L. McDowell


      The Interview Process

At most of the top tech companies (and many other companies), #algorithm and cod ing problems form the
largest component of the interview process. Think of these as problem-solving questions. The interviewer
is looking to evaluate your ability to solve #algorithmic problems you haven't seen before.

Very often, you might get through only one question in an interview. Forty-five minutes is not a long time,
and it's difficult to get through several different questions in that time frame.

You should do your best to talk out loud throughout the problem and explain your thought process. Your
interviewer might jump in sometimes to help you; let them. It's normal and doesn't really mean that you're
doing poorly. (That said, of course not needing hints is even better.)

At the end of the interview, the interviewer will walk away with a gut feel for how you did. A numeric score
might be assigned to your performance, but it's not actually a quantitative assessment. There's no chart that
says how many points you get for different things. It just doesn't work like that.

Rather, your interviewer will make an assessment of your performance, usually based on the following:

 Analytical skills: Did you need much help solving the problem? How optimal was your #solution? How
    long did it take you to arrive at a #solution? If you had to design/ architect a new #solution, did you struc-
    ture the problem well and think through the tradeoffs of different decisions?

 Coding skills: Were you able to successfully translate your #algorithm to reasonable #code? Was it clean
    and well-organized? Did you think about potential errors? Did you use good style?

 Technical knowledge / Computer Science fundamentals: Do you have a strong foundation in computer
    science and the relevant technologies?

 Experience: Have you made good technical decisions in the past? Have you built interesting, challenging
    projects? Have you shown drive, initiative, and other important factors?

 Culture fit / Communication skills: Do your personality and values fit with the company and team? Did
    you communicate well with your interviewer?

The weighting of these areas will vary based on the question, interviewer, role, team, and company. In a
standard #algorithm question, it might be almost entirely the first three of those.

~ Why?

This is one of the most common questions candidates have as they get started with this process. Why do
things this way? After all,

1. Lots of great cand idates don't do well in these sorts of interviews.

4  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


2. You could look up the answer if it did ever come up.
3. You rarely have to use #data structures such as binary search trees in the real world. If you did need to,

    you could surely learn it.
4. Whiteboard coding is an artificial environment. You would never #code on the whiteboard in the real

    world, obviously.
These complaints aren't without merit. In fact,l agree with all of them, at least in part.

At the same time, there is reason to do things this way for some-not all-positions. It's not important that
you agree with this logic, but it is a good idea to understand why these questions are being asked. It helps
offer a little insight into the interviewer's mind set.

False negatives are acceptable.
This is sad (and frustrating for candidates), but true.
From the company's perspective, it's actually acceptable that some good candidates are rejected. The
company is out to build a great set of employees. They can accept that they miss out on some good people.
They'd prefer not to, of course, as it raises their recruiting costs. It is an acceptable tradeoff, though, provided
they can still hire enough good people.
They're far more concerned with false positives: people who do well in an interview but are not in fact very
good.

Problem-solving skills are valuable.
If you're able to work through several hard problems (with some help, perhaps), you're probably pretty
good at developing optimal #algorithms. You're smart.

Smart people tend to do good things, and that's valuable at a company. It's not the only thing that matters,
of course, but it is a really good thing.

Basic #data structure and #algorithm knowledge is useful.

Many interviewers would argue that basic computer science knowledge is, in fact, useful. Understanding
trees, graphs, lists, sorting, and other knowledge does come up periodically. When it does, it's really valu-
able.

Could you learn it as needed? Sure. But it's very difficult to know that you should use a binary search tree if
you don't know of its existence. And if you do know of its existence, then you pretty much know the basics.

Other interviewers justify the reliance on #data structures and #algorithms by arguing that it's a good "proxy:'
Even if the skills wouldn't be that hard to learn on their own, they say it's reasonably well-correlated with
being a good developer. It means that you've either gone through a computer science program (in which
case you've learned and retained a reasonably broad set of technical knowledge) or learned this stuff on
your own. Either way, it's a good sign.

There's another reason why #data structure and #algorithm knowledge comes up: because it's hard to ask

problem-solving questions that don't involve them. It turns out that the vast majority of problem-solving

questions involve some of these basics. When enough candidates know these basics, it's easy to get into a
pattern of asking questions with them.

  5


Whiteboards let you focus on what matters.

It's absolutely true that you'd struggle with writing perfect #code on a whiteboard. Fortunately, your inter-
viewer doesn't expect that. Virtually everyone has some bugs or minor syntactical errors.
The nice thing about a whiteboard is that, in some ways, you can focus on the big picture. You don't have a
compiler, so you don't need to make your #code compile. You don't need to write the entire class definition
and boilerplate #code. You get to focus on the interesting, "meaty" parts of the #code: the function that the
question is really all about.

That's not to say that you should just write pseudocode or that correctness doesn't matter. Most inter-
viewers aren't okay with pseudocode, and fewer errors are better.

Whiteboards also tend to encourage candidates to speak more and explain their thought process. When a
candidate is given a computer, their communication drops substantially.

But it's not for everyone or every company or every situation.
The above sections are intended to help you understand the thought process of the company.
My personal thoughts? For the right situation, when done well, it's a reasonable judge of someone's
problem-solving skills, in that people who do well tend to be fairly smart.
However, it's often not done very well. You have bad interviewers or people who just ask bad questions.

It's also not appropriate for all companies. Some companies should value someone's prior experience more
or need skills with particular technologies. These sorts of questions don't put much weight on that.
It also won't measure someone's work ethic or ability to focus.Then again, almost no interview process can
really evaluate this.

This is not a perfect process by any means, but what is? All interview processes have their downsides.

I'll leave you with this: it is what it is, so let's do the best we can with it.

~ How Questions are Selected

Candidates frequently ask what the "recent" interview questions are at a specific company. Just asking this
question reveals a fundamental misunderstanding of where questions come from .
At the vast majority of companies, there are no lists of what interviewers should ask. Rather, each inter-
viewer selects their own questions.

Since it's somewhat of a "free for all" as far as questions, there's nothing that makes a question a "recent
Google interview question" other than the fact that some interviewer who happens to work at Google just
so happened to ask that question recently.
The questions asked this year at Google do not really differ from those asked three years ago. In fact, the
questions asked at Google generally don't differ from those asked at similar companies (Amazon, Facebook,
etc.) .

There are some broad differences across companies. Some companies focus on #algorithms (often with some
system design worked in), and others really like knowledge-based questions. But within a given category
of question, there is little that makes it "belong" to one company instead of another. A Google #algorithm
question is essentially the same as a Facebook #algorithm question.

6  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


~ It's All Relative

If there's no grading system, how are you evaluated? How does an interviewer know what to expect of you?
Good question. The answer actually makes a lot of sense once you understand it.
Interviewers assess you relative to other candidates on that same question by the same interviewer. It's a
relative comparison.
For example, suppose you came up with some cool new brainteaser or math problem. You ask your friend
Alex the question, and it takes him 30 minutes to solve it. You ask Bella and she takes 50 minutes. Chris is
never able to solve it. Dexter takes 15 minutes, but you had to give him some major hints and he probably
would have taken far longer without them. Ellie takes lO-and comes up with an alternate approach you
weren't even aware of. Fred takes 35 minutes.
You'll walk away saying, "Wow, Ellie did really well. I'll bet she's pretty good at math:' (Of course, she could
have just gotten lucky. And maybe Chris got unlucky. You might ask a few more questions just to really
make sure that it wasn't good or bad luck.)
Interview questions are much the same way. Your interviewer develops a feel for your performance by

comparing you to other people. It's not about the candidates she's interviewing that week. It's about all the

candidates that she's ever asked this question to.
For this reason, getting a hard question isn't a bad thing. When it's harder for you, it's harder for everyone. It
doesn't make it any less likely that you'll do well.

~ Frequently Asked Questions

I didn't hear back immediately after my interview. Am I rejected?
No. There are a number of reasons why a company's decision might be delayed. A very simple explanation
is that one of your interviewers hasn't provided their feedback yet. Very, very few companies have a policy
of not responding to candidates they reject.
If you haven't heard back from a company within 3 - 5 business days after your interview, check in (politely)
with your recruiter.

Can I re-apply to a company after getting rejected?
Almost always, but you typically have to wait a bit (6 months to a 1 year). Your first bad interview usually
won't affect you too much when you re-interview. Lots of people get rejected from Google or Microsoft and
later get offers from them.

  7


Most companies conduct their interviews in very similar ways. We will offer an overview of how companies
interview and what they're looking for.This information should guide your interview preparation and your
reactions during and after the interview.

Once you are selected for an interview, you usually go through a screening interview. This is typically
conducted over the phone.College candidates who attend top schools may have these interviews in-person.

Don't let the name fool you; the "screening" interview often involves coding and #algorithms questions, and
the bar can be just as high as it is for in-person interviews. If you're unsure whether or not the interview will
be technical, ask your recruiting coordinator what position your interviewer holds (or what the interview
might cover). An engineer will usually perform a technical interview.

Many companies have taken advantage of online synchronized document editors, but others will expect
you to write #code on paper and read it back over the phone. Some interviewers may even give you "home-
work" to solve after you hang up the phone or just ask you to email them the #code you wrote.

You typically do one or two screening interviewers before being brought on-site.

In an on-site interview round, you usually have 3 to 6 in-person interviews. One of these is often over lunch.
The lunch interview is usually not technical, and the interviewer may not even submit feedback. This is a
good person to discuss your interests with and to ask about the company culture.Your other interviews will
be mostly technical and will involve a combination of coding, #algorithm, design/architecture, and behav-
ioral/experience questions.

The distribution of questions between the above topics varies between companies and even teams due to
company priorities, size, and just pure randomness. Interviewers are often given a good deal of freedom in
their interview questions.

After your interview, your interviewers will provide feedback in some form. In some companies, your inter-
viewers meet together to discuss your performance and come to a decision. In other companies, inter-
viewers submit a recommendation to a hiring manager or hiring committee to make a final decision. In
some companies, interviewers don't even make the decision; their feedback goes to a hiring committee to
make a decision.

Most companies get back after about a week with next steps (offer, rejection, further interviews, or just an
update on the process). Some companies respond much sooner (sometimes same day!) and others take
much longer.

If you have waited more than a week, you should follow up w ith your recruiter. If your recruiter does not

respond, this does not mean that you are rejected (at least not at any major tech company, and almost any

8  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


other company). let me repeat that again: not responding indicates nothing about your status. The inten-
tion is that all recruiters should tell candidates once a final decision is made.
Delays can and do happen. Follow up with your recruiter if you expect a delay, but be respectful when you
do. Recruiters are just like you. They get busy and forgetful too.

 The Microsoft Interview

Microsoft wants smart people. Geeks. People who are passionate about technology. You probably won't be

tested on the ins and outs of c++ APls, but you will be expected to write #code on the board.

In a typical interview, you'll show up at Microsoft at some time in the morning and fill out initial paper work.
You'll have a short interview with a recruiter who will give you a sample question. Your recruiter is usually
there to prep you, not to grill you on technical questions. If you get asked some basic technical questions,
it may be because your recruiter wants to ease you into the interview so that you're less nervous when the
"real" interview starts.
Be nice to your recruiter. Your recruiter can be your biggest advocate, even pushing to re-interview you if
you stumbled on your first interview. They can fight for you to be hired-or not!
During the day, you'll do four or five interviews, often with two different teams. Unlike many companies,
where you meet your interviewers in a conference room, you'll meet with your Microsoft interviewers in
their office. This is a great time to look around and get a feel for the team culture.
Depending on the team, interviewers mayor may not share their feedback on you with the rest of the
interview loop.
When you complete your interviews with a team, you might speak with a hiring manager (often called the
"as app'; short for "as appropriate"). If so, that's a great sign! It likely means that you passed the interviews
with a particular team. It's now down to the hiring manager's decision.
You might get a decision that day, or it might be a week. After one week of no word from HR, send a friendly
email asking for a status update.
If your recruiter isn't very responsive, it's because she's busy, not because you're being silently rejected.

Definitely Prepare:
"Why do you want to work for Microsoft?"
In this question, Microsoft wants to see that you're passionate about technology. A great answer might be,
"I've been using Microsoft software as long as I can remember, and I'm really impressed at how Microsoft
manages to create a product that is universally excellent. For example, I've been using Visual Studio recently
to learn game programming, and its APls are excellent:' Note how this shows a passion for technology!

What's Unique:

You'll only reach the hiring manager if you've done well, so if you do, that's a great sign!
Additionally, Microsoft tends to give teams more individual control, and the product set is diverse. Experi-
ences can vary substantially across Microsoft since different teams look for different things.

(rackingThe(odinglnterview.com 16th Edition  9
// I Behind the Scenes

~ The Amazon Interview

Amazon's recruiting process typically begins with a phone screen in which a candidate interviews with a
specific team . A small portion of the time, a candidate may have two or more interviews, which can indicate
either that one of their interviewers wasn't convinced or that they are being considered for a different team
or profile. In more unusual cases, such as when a candidate is local or has recently interviewed for a different
position, a candidate may only do one phone screen.

The engineer who interviews you will usually ask you to write simple #code via a shared document editor.
They will also often ask a broad set of questions to explore what areas of technology you 're familiar with.
Next, you fly to Seattle (or whichever office you're interviewing for) for four or five interviews with one or
two teams that have selected you based on your resume and phone interviews. You will have to #code on a
whiteboard, and some interviewers will stress other skills. Interviewers are each assigned a specific area to
probe and may seem very different from each other. They cannot see the other feedback until they have
submitted their own, and they are discouraged from discussing it until the hiring meeting.

The "bar raiser " interviewer is charged with keeping the interview bar high.They attend special training and
will interview candidates outside their group in order to balance out the group itself. If one interview seems
significantly harder and different, that's most likely the bar raiser. This person has both significant experi-
ence with interviews and veto power in the hiring decision. Remember, though: just because you seem to
be struggling more in this interview doesn't mean you're actually doing worse. Your performance is judged
relative to other candidates; it's not evaluated on a simple "percent correct" basis.

Once your interviewers have entered their feedback, they will meet to discuss it. They will be the people
making the hiring decision.
While Amazon's recruiters are usually excellent at following up with candidates, occasionally there are
delays. If you haven't heard from Amazon within a week, we recommend a friendly email.

Definitely Prepare:

Amazon cares a lot about scale. Make sure you prepare for scalability questions. You don't need a back-
ground in distributed systems to answer these questions. See our recommendations in the System Design
and Scalability chapter.

Additionally, Amazon tends to ask a lot of questions about object-oriented design. Check out the Object-
Oriented Design chapter for sample questions and suggestions.

What's Unique:

The Bar Raiser is brought in from a different team to keep the bar high . You need to impress both this person
and the hiring manager.

Amazon tends to experiment more with its hiring process than other companies do. The process described
here is the typical experience, but due to Amazon's experimentation, it's not necessarily universal.

~ The Google Interview

There are many scary rumors floating around about Google interviews, but they're mostly just that: rumors.
The interview is not terribly different from Microsoft's or Amazon's.

10  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


A Google engineer performs the first phone screen, so expect tough technical questions. These questions
may involve coding, sometimes via a shared document. Candidates are typically held to the same standard
and are asked similar questions on phone screens as in on-site interviews.
On your on-site interview, you'll interview with four to six people, one of whom will be a lunch interviewer.
Interviewer feedback is kept confidential from the other interviewers, so you can be assured that you enter
each interview with blank slate. Your lunch interviewer doesn't submit feedback, so this is a great opportu-
nity to ask honest questions.

Interviewers are typically not given specific focuses, and there is no "structure" or "system" as to what you're
asked when. Each interviewer can conduct the interview however she would like.
Written feedback is submitted to a hiring committee (HC) of engineers and managers to make a hire /
no-hire recommendation. Feedback is typically broken down into four categories (Analytical Ability, Coding,
Experience, and Communication) and you are given an overall score from 1.0 to 4.0. The HC usually does not
include any of your interviewers. If it does, it was purely by random chance.
To extend an offer, the HC wants to see at least one interviewer who is an "enthusiastic endorser:' In other
words, a packet with scores of 3.6,3.1,3.1 and 2.6 is better than all 3.1s.

You do not necessarily need to excel in every interview, and your phone screen performance is usually not
a strong factor in the final decision.

If the hiring committee recommends an offer, your packet will go to a compensation committee and then
to the executive management committee. Returning a decision can take several weeks because there are
so many stages and committees.

Definitely Prepare:

As a web-based company, Google cares about how to design a scalable system. So, make sure you prepare
for questions from System Design and Scalability.
Google puts a strong focus on analytical (algorithm) skills, regardless of experience. You should be very well
prepared for these questions, even if you think your prior experience should count for more.

What's Different:

Your interviewers do not make the hiring decision. Rather, they enter feedback which is passed to a hiring
committee. The hiring committee recommends a decision which can be-though rarely is-rejected by
Google executives.

~ The Apple Interview

Much like the company itself, Apple's interview process has minimal bureaucracy. The interviewers will be
looking for excellent technical skills, but a passion for the position and the company is also very important.
While it's not a prerequisite to be a Mac user, you should at least be familiar with the system.

The interview process usually begins with a recruiter phone screen to get a basic sense of your skills,
followed up by a series of technical phone screens with team members.
Once you're invited on campus, you'll typically be g reeted by the recruiter who provides an overview of the
process.You will then have 6-8 interviews with members of the team with which you're interviewing, as well
as key people with whom your team works.

  11


You can expect a mix of one-on-one and two-on-one interviews. Be ready to #code on a whiteboard and
make sure all of your t houghts are clearly communicated. Lunch is with your potential future manager and
appears more casual, but it is still an interview. Each interviewer usually focuses on a different area and
is discouraged from sharing feedback with other interviewers unless t here's something they want subse-
quent interviewers to drill into.

Towards the end of the day, your interviewers will compare notes. If everyone still feels you 're a viable candi-
date, you will have an interview with the director and the VP of the organization to which you're applying.
While this decision is rather informal, it's a very good sign if you make it. This decision also happens behind
the scenes, and if you don't pass, you'll simply be escorted out of the building without ever having been
the wiser (until now).

If you made it to the director and VP interviews, all of your interviewers will gather in a conference room
to give an official thumbs up or thumbs down. The VP typically won't be present but can still veto the hire
if they weren't impressed. Your recruiter will usually follow up a few days later, but feel free to ping him or
her for updates.

Definitely Prepare:

If you know what team you're interviewing with, make sure you read up on that product. What do you like
about it? What would you improve? Offering specific recommendations can show your passion for the job.

What's Unique:

Apple does two-on-one interviews often, but don't get stressed out about them- it's the same as a one-on-
one interview!

Also, Apple employees are huge Apple fans. You should show this same passion in your interview.

~ The Facebook Interview

Once selected for an interview, candidates will generally do one or two phone screens. Phone screens will
be technical and will involve coding, usually an online document editor.

After the phone interview(s), you might be asked to do a homework assignment that will include a mix of
coding and #algorithms. Pay attention to your coding style here. If you've never worked in an environment
which had thorough #code reviews, it may be a good idea to get someone who has to review your #code.

During your on-site interview, you will interview primarily with other software engineers, but hiring
managers are also involved whenever they are available. All interviewers have gone through comprehen-
sive interview training, and who you interview with has no bearing on your odds of getting an offer.

Each interviewer is given a "role" during the on-site interviews, which helps ensure that there are no repeti-
tive questions and that they get a holistic picture of a candidate.These roles are:
 Behavioral ("Jedi"): This interview assesses your ability to be successful in Facebook's environment.

    Would you fit well with the culture and values? What are you excited about? How do you tackle chal-
    lenges? Be prepared to talk about your interest in Facebook as well. Facebook wants passionate people.
    You might also be asked some coding questions in this interview.
 Coding and #Algorithms ("Ninja"): These are your standard coding and #algorithms questions, much like
    what you'll find in this book. These questions are designed to be challenging.You can use any program-
    ming language you want.

12  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


 Design/Architecture ("Pirate"): For a backend software engineer, you might be asked system design
    questions. Front-end or other specialties will be asked design questions related to that discipline. You
    should openly discuss different #solutions and their tradeoffs.

You can typically expect two "ninja" interviews and one "jedi" interview. Experienced candidates will also
usually get a "pirate" interview.

After your interview, interviewers submit written feedback, prior to discussing your performance with each
other. This ensures that your performance in one interview will not bias another interviewer's feedback.
Once everyone's feedback is submitted, your interviewing team and a hiring manager get together to
collaborate on a final decision. They come to a consensus decision and submit a final hire recommendation
to the hiring committee.

Definitely Prepare:

The youngest of the "elite" tech companies, Facebook wants developers with an entrepreneurial spirit. In
your interviews, you should show that you love to build stuff fast.

They want to know you can hack together an elegant and scalable #solution using any language of choice.
Knowing PHP is not especially important, particularly given that Facebook also does a lot of backend work
in C++, Python, Erlang, and other languages.

What's Unique:

Facebook interviews developers for the company "in general:' not for a specific team. If you are hired, you
will go through a six-week "bootcamp" which will help ramp you up in the massive #code base. You'll get
mentorship from senior devs, learn best practices, and, ultimately, get a greater flexibility in choosing a
project than if you were assigned to a project in your interview.

~ The Palantir Interview

Unlike some companies which do "pooled" interviews (where you interview with the company as a whole,
not with a specific team), Palantir interviews for a specific team. Occasionally, your application might be
re-routed to another team where there is a better fit.

The Palantir interview process typically starts with two phone interviews. These interviews are about 30 to
45 minutes and will be primarily technical. Expect to cover a bit about your prior experience, with a heavy
focus on #algorithm questions.

You might also be sent a HackerRank coding assessment, which will evaluate your ability to write optimal
algorithms and correct #code. Less experienced candidates, such as those in college, are particularly likely
to get such a test.

After this, successful candidates are invited to campus and will interview with up to five people. Onsite
interviews cover your prior experience, relevant domain knowledge, #data structures and #algorithms, and
design.

You may also likely get a demo of Palantir's products. Ask good questions and demonstrate your passion
for the company.

After the interview, the interviewers meet to discuss your feedback with the hiring manager.

  13


Definitely Prepare:

Palantir values hiring brilliant engineers. Many candidates report that Palantir's questions were harder than
those they saw at Google and other top companies.This doesn't necessarily mean it's harder to get an offer
(although it certainly can); it just means interviewers prefer more challenging questions. If you're inter-
viewing with Palantir, you should learn your core #data structures and #algorithms inside and out. Then, focus
on preparing with the hardest #algorithm questions.

Brush up on system design too if you're interviewing for a backend role. This is an important part of the
process.

What's Unique:

A coding challenge is a common part of Palantir's process. Although you'll be at your computer and can
look up material as needed, don't walk into this unprepared. The questions can be extremely challenging
and the efficiency of your #algorithm will be evaluated. Thorough interview preparation will help you here.
You can also practice coding challenges online at HackerRank.com.

14  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
 //I

Special Situations

There are many paths that lead someone to this book. Perhaps you have more experience but have never
done this sort of interview. Perhaps you're a tester or a PM. Or perhaps you 're actually using this book to
teach yourself how to interview better. Here's a little something for all these "special situations:'

~ Experienced Candidates

Some people assume that the #algorithm-style questions you see in this book are only for recent grads.
That's not entirely true.

More experienced engineers might see slightly less focus on #algorithm questions-but only slightly

/fa company asks #algorithm questions to inexperienced candidates, they tend to ask them to experienced
candidates too. Rightly or wrongly, they feel that the skills demonstrated in these questions are important
for all developers.
Some interviewers might hold experience candidates to a somewhat lower standard. After all, it's been
years since these candidates took an #algorithms class. They're out of practice.

Others though hold experienced candidates to a higher standard, reasoning that the more years of experi-
ence allow a candidate to have seen many more types of problems.
On average, it balances out.

The exception to this rule is system design and architecture questions, as well as questions about your
resume. Typically, students don't study much system architecture, so experience with such challenges
would only come professionally. Your performance in such interview questions would be evaluated with
respect to your experience level. However, students and recent graduates are still asked these questions
and should be prepared to solve them as well as they can.
Additionally, experienced candidates will be expected to give a more in-depth, impressive response to
questions like, "What was the hardest bug you've faced?" You have more experience, and your response to
these questions should show it.

~ Testers and SDETs

SDETs (softwa re design engineers in test) write #code, but to test features instead of build features. As such,
they have to be great #coders and great testers. Double the prep work!

If you're applying for an SDET role, take the following approach:

  1 S
1111 Special Situations

 Prepare the Core Testing Problems: For example, how would you test a light bulb? A pen? A cash register?
    Microsoft Word? The Testing chapter will give you more background on these problems.

    Practice the Coding Questions:The number one thing that SDETs get rejected for is coding skills. Although
    coding standards are typically lower for an SDET than for a traditional developer, SDETs are still expected
    to be very strong in coding and #algorithms. Make sure that you practice solving all the same coding and
    #algorithm questions that a regular developer would get.

 Practice Testing the Coding Questions: A very popular format for SDET questions is "Write #code to do X;'
    followed up by, "Okay, now test it:' Even when the question doesn't specifically require this, you should
    ask yourself, "How would I test this?" Remember: any problem can be an SDET problem!

Strong communication skills can also be very important for testers, since your job requires you to work with
so many different people. Do not neglect the Behavioral Questions section.

Career Advice

Finally, a word of career advice: If, like many candidates, you are hoping to apply to an SDET position as the
"easy" way into a company, be aware that many candidates find it very difficult to move from an SDET posi-
tion to a dev position. Make sure to keep your cod ing and #algorithms skills very sharp if you hope to make
this move, and try to switch within one to two years. Otherwise, you might find it very difficult to be taken
seriously in a dev interview.

Never let your coding skills atrophy.

~ Product (and Program) Management

These "PM" roles vary wildly across companies and even within a company. At Microsoft, for instance, some
PMs may be essentially customer evangelists, working in a customer-facing role that borders on marketing.
Across campus though, other PMs may spend much of their day coding. The latter type of PMs would likely
be tested on coding, since this is an important part of their job function .

Generally speaking, interviewers for PM positions are looking for candidates to demonstrate skills in the
following areas:

 Handling Ambiguity: This is typically not the most critical area for an interview, but you should be aware
    that interviewers do look for skill here. Interviewers want to see that, when faced with an ambiguous
    situation, you don't get overwhelmed and stall. They want to see you tackle the problem head on:
    seeking new information, prioritizing the most important parts, and solving the problem in a structured
    way. This typically will not be tested directly (though it can be), but it may be one of many things the
    interviewer is looking for in a problem.

    Customer Focus (Attitude): Interviewers want to see that your attitude is customer-focused . Do you
    assume that everyone will use the product just like you do? Or are you the type of person who puts
    himself in the customer's shoes and tries to understand how they want to use the product? Questions
    like "Design an alarm clock for the blind" are ripe for examining this aspect. When you hear a question
    like this, be sure to ask a lot of questions to understand who the customer is and how they are using the
    product. The skills covered in the Testing section are closely related to this.

    Customer Focus (Technical Skills): Some teams with more complex products need to ensure that their PMs
    walk in with a strong understanding of the product, as it would be difficult to acquire this knowledge on
    the job. Deep technical knowledge of mobile phones is probably not necessary to work on the Android
    or Windows Phone teams (although it might still be nice to have), whereas an understanding of security
    might be necessary to work on Windows Security. Hopefully, you wouldn't interview with a team that

16  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                             1111 Special Situations

    required specific technical skills unless you at least claim to possess the requisite skills.

    Multi-Level Communication: PMs need to be able to communicate with people at all levels in the
    company, across many positions and ranges of technical skills. Your interviewer will want to see that you
    possess this flexibility in your communication. This is often examined directly, through a question such
    as, "Explain TCP/IP to your grandmother:'Your communication skills may also be assessed by how you
    discuss your prior projects.

 Passion for Technology: Happy employees are productive employees, so a company wants to make sure
    that you 'll enjoy the job and be excited about your work. A passion for technology-and, ideally, the
    company or team-should come across in your answers. You may be asked a question directly like, "Why
    are you interested in Microsoft?" Additionally, your interviewers will look for enthusiasm in how you
    discuss your prior experience and how you discuss the team's challenges. They want to see that you will
    be eager to face the job's challenges.

    Teamwork I Leadership: This may be the most important aspect of the interview, and-not surpris-
    ingly-the job itself. All interviewers will be looking for your ability to work well with other people. Most
    commonly, this is assessed with questions like, "Tell me about a time when a teammate wasn't pulling
    his / her own weight:' Your interviewer is looking to see that you handle conflicts well, that you take
    initiative, that you understand people, and that people like working with you. Your work preparing for
    behavioral questions will be extremely important here.

All of the above areas are important skills for PMs to master and are therefore key focus areas of the inter-
view. The weighting of each of these areas will roughly match the importance that the area holds in the
actual job.

~ Dev Lead and Managers

Strong coding skills are almost always required for dev lead positions and often for management positions

as well. If you'll be coding on the job, make sure to be very strong with coding and #algorithms-just like a

dev would be. Google, in particular, holds managers to high standards when it comes to coding.

In addition, prepare to be examined for skills in the following areas:

 Teamwork I Leadership: Anyone in a management-like role needs to be able to both lead and work with
    people. You will be examined implicitly and explicitly in these areas. Explicit evaluation will come in the
    form of asking you how you handled prior situations, such as when you disagreed with a manager. The
    implicit evaluation comes in the form of your interviewers watching how you interact with them. If you
    come off as too arrogant or too passive, your interviewer may feel you aren't great as a manager.

 Prioritization: Managers are often faced with tricky issues, such as how to make sure a team meets a
    tough deadline. Your interviewers will want to see that you can prioritize a project appropriately, cutting
    the less important aspects. Prioritization means asking the right questions to understand what is critical
    and what you can reasonably expect to accomplish.

    Communication: Managers need to communicate with people both above and below them, and poten-
    tially with customers and other much less technical people. Interviewers will look to see that you can
    communicate at many levels and that you can do so in a way that is friendly and engaging. This is, in
    some ways, an evaluation of your personality.

    "Getting Things Done": Perhaps the most important thing that a manager can do is be a person who "gets
    things done:'This means striking the right balance between preparing for a project and actually imple-
    menting it. You need to understand how to structure a project and how to motivate people so you can
    accomplish the team's goals.

  17
1111 Special Situations

Ultimately, most of these areas come back to your prior experience and your personality. Be sure to prepare
very, very thoroughly using the interview preparation grid.

~ Startups

The application and interview process for startups is highly variable. We can't go through every startup,
but we can offer some general pointers. Understand, however, that the process at a specific startup might
deviate from this.

The Application Process
Many startups might post job listings, but for the hottest startups, often the best way in is through a personal
referral. This reference doesn't necessarily need to be a close friend or a coworker. Often just by reaching
out and expressing your interest, you can get someone to pick up your resume to see if you're a good fit.

Visas and Work Authorization
Unfortunately, many smaller startups in the U.s. are not able to sponsor work visas. They hate the system
as much you do, but you won't be able to convince them to hire you anyway. If you require a visa and wish
to work at a startup, your best bet is to reach out to a professional recruiter who works with many startups
(and may have a better idea of which startups will work with visa issues), or to focus your search on bigger
startups.

Resume Selection Factors
Startups tend to want engineers who are not only smart and who can #code, but also people who would
work well in an entrepreneurial environment. Your resume should ideally show initiative. What sort of proj-
ects have you started?
Being able to "hit the ground running" is also very important; they want people who already know the
language of the company.

The Interview Process
In contrast to big companies, which tend to look mostly at your general aptitude with respect to software
development, startups often look closely at your personality fit, skill set, and prior experience.

    Personality Fit: Personality fit is typically assessed by how you interact with your interviewer. Establishing
    a friendly, engaging conversation with your interviewers is your ticket to many job offers.
    Skill Set: Because startups need people who can hit the ground running, they are likely to assess your
    skills with specific programming languages. If you know a language that the startup works with, make
    sure to brush up on the details.
    Experience: Startups are likely to ask you a lot of questions about your experience. Pay special attention
    to the Behavioral Questions section.
In addition to the above areas, the coding and #algorithms questions that you see in this book are also very
common.

18  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                            1111 Special Situations

~ Acquisitions and Acquihires

During the technical due diligence process for many acquisitions, the acquirer will often interview most or
all of a startu p's employees. Google, Yahoo, Facebook, and many other companies have this as a standard
part of many acquisitions.

Which startups go through this? And why?
Part of the reasoning for this is that their employees had to go through this process to get hired. They don't
want acquisit ions to be an "easy way" into the company. And, since the team is a core motivator for the
acquisition, they figure it makes sense to assess the skills of the team.
Not all acquisitions are like this, of course. The famous multi-billion dollar acquisitions generally did not
have to go th rough this process. Those acquisitions, after all, are usually about the user base and commu-
nity, less so about the employees or even the technology. Assessing the team's skills is less essential.
However, it is not as simple as "acquihires get interviewed, traditional acquisitions do not:'There is a big gray
area between acquihires (Le., talent acquisitions) and product acquisitions. Many startups are acquired for
the team and ideas behind the technology.The acquirer might discontinue the product, but have the team
work on something very similar.
If your startup is going through this process, you can typically expect your team to have interviews very
similar to what a normal candidate would experience (and, therefore, very similar to what you'll see in this
book).

How important are these interviews?
These interviews can carry enormous importance. They have three different roles:
 They can make or break acquisitions. They are often the reason a company does not get acquired.
 They determine which employees receive offers to join the acquirer.

    They can affect the acquisition price (in part as a consequence of the number of employees who join).
These interviews are much more than a mere "screen:'

Which employees go through the interviews?
For tech startups, usually all of the engineers go through the interview process, as they are one of the core
motivators for the acquisition.
In addition, sales, customer support, product managers, and essentially any other role might have to go
through it.
The CEO is often slotted into a product manager interview or a dev manager interview, as this is often the
closest match for the CEO's current responsibilities.This is not an absolute rule, though . It depends on what
the CEO's role presently is and what the CEO is interested in. With some of my clients, the CEO has even
opted to not interview and to leave the company upon the acquisition.

What happens to employees who don't perform well in the interview?
Employees w ho underperform will often not receive offers to join the acquirer. (If many employees don't
perform well, t hen the acquisition will likely not go through.)

  19
1111 Special Situations

In some cases, employees who performed poorly in interviews will get contract positions for the purpose of
"knowledge transfer:' These are temporary positions with the expectation that the employee leaves at the
termination of the contract (often six months), although sometimes the employee ends up being retained.
In other cases, the poor performance was a result of the employee being mis-slotted. This occurs in two
common situations:

    Sometimes a startup labels someone who is not a "traditional " software engineer as a software engineer.
    This often happens with #data scientists or #database engineers. These people may underperform during
    the software engineer interviews, as their actual role involves other skills.
    In other cases, a CEO "sells" a junior software engineer as more senior than he actually is. He underper-
    forms for the senior bar because he's being held to an unfairly high standard.
In either case, sometimes the employee will be re-interviewed for a more appropriate position. (Other times
though, the employee is just out of luck.)
In rare cases, a CEO is able to override the decision for a particularly strong employee whose interview
performance didn't reflect this.

Your "best" (and worst) employees might surprise you.
The problem-solving/ #algorithm interviews conducted at the top tech companies evaluate particular skills,
which might not perfectly match what their manager evaluates in their employees.

I've worked with many companies that are surprised at who their strongest and weakest performers are in
interviews. That junior engineer who still has a lot to learn about professional development might turn out
to be a great problem-solver in these interviews.
Don't count anyone out-or in-until you've evaluated them the same way their interviewers will.

Are employees held to the same standards as typical candidates?
Essentially yes, although there is a bit more leeway.
The big companies tend to take a risk-averse approach to hiring. If someone is on the fence, they often lean
towards a no-hire.
In the case of an acquisition, the "on the fence" employees can be pulled through by strong performance
from the rest of the team.

How do employees tend to react to the news of an acquisition/acquihire?
This is a big concern for many startup CEOs and founders. Will the employees be upset about this process?
Or, what if we get their hopes up but it doesn't happen?
What I've seen with my clients is that the leadership is worried about this more than is necessary.
Certainly, some employees are upset about the process.They might not be excited about joining one of the
big companies for any number of reasons.
Most employees, though, are cautiously optimistic about the process.They hope it goes through, but they
know that the existence of these interviews means that it might not.

20  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                          1111 Special Situations

What happens to the team after an acquisition?
Every situation is different. However, most of my clients have been kept together as a team, or possibly
integrated into an existing team.

How should you prepare your team for acquisition interviews?

Interview prep for acquisition interviews is fairly similar to typical interviews at the acquirer. The difference
is that your company is doing this as a team and that each employee wasn't individually selected for the
interview on their own merits.

You're all in this together.
Some startups I've worked with put their "real" work on hold and have their teams spend the next two or
three weeks on interview prep.
Obviously, that's not a choice all companies can make, but- from the perspective of wanting the acquisi-
tion to go through-that does increase your results substantially.
Your team should study individually, in teams of two or three, or by doing mock interviews with each other.
If possible, use all three of these approaches.

Some people may be less prepared than others.
Many developers at startups might have only vaguely heard of big 0 time, binary search tree, breadth-first
search, and other important concepts. They'll need some extra time to prepare.
People without computer science degrees (or who earned their degrees a long time ago) should focus
first on learning the core concepts discussed in this book, especially big 0 t ime (which is one of the most
important). A good first exercise is to implement all the core #data structures and #algorithms from scratch.
If the acquisition is important to your company, give these people the time they need to prepare. They'll
need it.

Don't wait until the last minute.
As a startup, you might be used to taking things as they come without a ton of planning. Startups that do
this with acquisition interviews tend not to fare well.
Acquisition interviews often come up very suddenly. A company's CEO is chatting with an acquirer (or
several acquirers) and conversations get increasingly serious. The acquirer mentions the possibility of inter-
views at some point in the future. Then, all of a sudden, there's a "come in at the end of this week" message.
If you wait until there's a firm date set for the interviews, you probably won't get much more than a couple
of days to prepare. That might not be enough time for your engineers to learn core computer science
concepts and practice interview questions.

~ For Interviewers

Since writing the last edition, I've learned that a lot of interviewers are using Cracking the Coding Interview
to learn how to interview. That wasn't really the book's intention, but I might as well offer some guidance
for interviews.

  21
1111 Special Situations

Don't actually ask the exact questions in here.
First, these questions were selected because they're good for interview preparation. Some questions that
are good for interview preparation are not always good for interviewing. For example, there are some
brainteasers in this book because sometimes interviewers ask these sorts of questions. It's worthwhile for
candidates to practice those if they're interviewing at a company that likes them, even though I personally
find them to be bad questions.
Second, your candidates are reading this book, too. You don't want to ask questions that your candidates
have already solved.
You can ask questions similar to these, but don't just pluck questions out of here. Your goal is to test their
problem-solving skills, not their memorization skills.

Ask Medium and Hard Problems
The goal of these questions is to evaluate someone's problem-solving skills. When you ask questions that
are too easy, performance gets clustered together. Minor issues can substantially drop someone's perfor-
mance. It's not a reliable indicator.

Look for questions with multiple hurdles.
Some questions have "Aha!" moments.They rest on a particular insight. If the candidate doesn't get that one
bit, then they do poorly. If they get it, then suddenly they've outperformed many candidates.

Even if that insight is an indicator of skills, it's still only one indicator. Ideally, you want a question that has a
series of hurdles, insights, or optimizations. Multiple #data points beat a single #data point.
Here's a test: if you can give a hint or piece of guidance that makes a substantial difference in a candidate's
performance, then it's probably not a good interview question.

Use hard questions, not hard knowledge.
Some interviewers, in an attempt to make a question hard, inadvertently make the know/edge hard. Sure
enough, fewer candidates do well so the statistics look right, but it's not for reasons that indicate much
about the candidates' skills.
The knowledge you are expecting candidates to have should be fairly straightforward #data structure and
algorithm knowledge. It's reasonable to expect a computer science graduate to understand the basics of
big 0 and trees. Most won't remember Dijkstra's #algorithm or the specifics of how AVL trees works.
If your interview question expects obscure knowledge, ask yourself: is this truly an important skill? Is it so
important that I would like to either reduce the number of candidates I hire or reduce the amount to which
I focus on problem-solving or other skills?
Every new skill or attribute you evaluate shrinks the number of offers extended, unless you counter-balance
this by relaxing the requirements for a different skill. Sure, all else being equal, you might prefer someone
who could recite the finer points of a two-inch thick #algorithms textbook. But all else isn't equal.

Avoid "scary" questions.
Some questions intimidate candidates because it seems like they involve some specialized knowledge,
even if they really don't. This often includes questions that involve:
 Math or probability.

22  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                       1111 Special Situations

 low-level knowledge (memory allocation, etc.) .
 System design or scalability.
 Proprietary systems (Google Maps, etc.).

For example, one question I sometimes ask is to find all positive integer #solutions under 1,000 to a3 + b3

= c 3 + d3 (page 68).

Many candidates will at first think they have to do some sort of fancy factorization of this or semi-advanced
math. They don't. They need to understand the concept of exponents, sums, and equality, and that's it.

When I ask this question, I explicitly say, "I know this sounds like a math problem. Don't worry. It's not. It's an
algorithm question:' If they start going down the path of factorization, I stop them and remind them that
it's not a math question.

Other questions might involve a bit of probability. It might be stuff that a candidate would surely know (e.g.,
to pick between five options, pick a random number between 1 and 5). But simply the fact that it involves
probability will intimidate candidates.

Be careful asking questions that sound intimidating. Remember that this is already a really intimidating
situation for candidates. Adding on a "scary" question might just fluster a candidate and cause him to
underperform.

If you're going to ask a question that sounds "scary:' make sure you really reassure candidates that it doesn't
require the knowledge that they think it does.

Offer positive reinforcement.

Some interviewers put so much focus on the "right" question that they forget to think about their own
behavior.

Many candidates are intimidated by interviewing and try to read into the interviewer's every word. They
can cling to each thing that might possibly sound positive or negative.They interpret that little comment of
"good luck" to mean something, even though you say it to everyone regardless of performance.

You want candidates to feel good about the experience, about you, and about their performance. You want
them to feel comfortable. A candidate who is nervous will perform poorly, and it doesn't mean that they
aren't good. Moreover, a good candidate who has a negative reaction to you or to the company is less likely
to accept an offer-and they might dissuade their friends from interviewing/accepting as well .

Try to be warm and friendly to candidates. This is easier for some people than others, but do your best.

Even if being warm and friendly doesn't come naturally to you, you can still make a concerted effort to
sprinkle in positive remarks throughout the interview:

 "Right, exactly:'
 "Great point:'
 "Good work:'
 "Okay, that's a really interesting approach:'

    "Perfect:'

No matter how poorly a candidate is doing, there is always something they got right. Find a way to infuse
some positivity into the interview.

  23
1111 Special Situations

Probe deeper on behavioral questions.

Many candidates are poor at articulating their specific accomplishments.

You ask them a question about a challenging situation, and they tell you about a difficult situation their
team faced . As fa r as you can tell, the candidat e didn't really do much.

Not so fast, though. A candidate might not focus on themselves because they've been trained to celebrate
their team's accomplishments and not boast about themselves. This is especially common for people in
leadership roles and female candidates.

Don't assume that a candidate didn't do much in a situation just because you have trouble understanding
what they did. Call out the situation (nicely!). Ask them specifically if they can tell you what their role was.

If it didn't really sound like resolving the situation was difficult, then, again, probe deeper. Ask them to go
into more details about how they thought about the issue and the different steps they took. Ask them why
they took certai n actions. Not describing the details of the actions they took makes them a flawed candi-

date, but not necessarily a flawed employee.

Being a good interview candidate is its own skill (after all, that 's part of why this book exists), and it's prob-
ably not one you want to evaluate.

Coach your candidates.

Read through the sections on how candidates can develop good #algorithms. Many of these tips are ones
you can offer to candidates who are struggling. You're not "teaching to the test" when you do this; you're
separating interview skills from job skills.

 Many candidates don't use an example to solve an interview question (or they don't use a good
    example).Th is makes it substantially more difficult to develop a #solution, but it doesn't necessarily mean
    that they're not very good problem solvers. If candidates don't write an example themselves, or if they
    inadvertently write a special case, guide them.

    Some candidates take a long time to find the bug because they use an enormous example.This doesn't
    make them a bad tester or developer. It just means that they d idn't realize that it would be more efficient
    to analyze their #code conceptually first, or that a small example would work nearly as well. Guide them.

 If they dive into #code before they have an optimal #solution, pull them back and focus them on the algo-
    rithm (if that's what you want to see). It's unfair to say that a candidate never found or implemented the
    optimal #solution if they didn't really have the time to do so.
    If they get nervous and stuck and aren't sure where to go, suggest to them that they walk through the
    brute force #solution and look for areas to optimize.

 If they haven't said anything and there is a fairly obvious brute force, remind them that they can start off
    with a brute force. Their first #solution doesn't have to be perfect.

Even if you think that a candidate's ability in one of these areas is an important factor, it's not the only factor.
You can always mark someone down for "failing" this hurdle while helping to guide them past it.

While this book is here to coach candidates through interviews, one of your goals as an interviewer is to
remove the effect of not preparing. After all, some candidates have studied for interviews and some candi-
dates haven't, and this probably doesn't reveal much about their skills as an engineer.

Guide candidates using the tips in this book (within reason, of course- you don't want to coach candidates
through the problems so much that you're not evaluating their problem-solving skills anymore) .

24  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                         1111 Special Situations

Be careful here, though. If you're someone who comes off as intimidating to candidates, this coaching could
make things worse. It can come off as your telling candidates t hat they're constantly messing up by creating
bad examples, not prioritizing testing the right way, and so on.

If they want silence, give them silence.

One of the most common questions that candidates ask me is how to deal with an interviewer who insists
on talking when they just need a moment to think in silence.

If your candidate needs this, give your candidate this time to think. Lea rn to distinguish between "I'm stuck
and have no idea what to do;' and "I'm thinking in silence:'

It might help you to guide your candidate, and it might help many candidates, but it doesn't necessarily

help all candidates. Some need a moment to think. Give them that time, and take into account when you're

evaluating them that they got a bit less guidance than others.

Know your mode: sanity check, quality, specialist, and proxy.

At a very, very high level, there are four modes of questions:

 Sanity Check: These are often easy problem-solving or design questions. They assess a minimum
    degree of competence in problem-solving. They won't tell distinguish between "okay" versus "great'; so
    don't evaluate them as such. You can use them early in the process (to filter out the worst candidates), or
    when you only need a minimum degree of competency.
    Quality Check: These are the more challenging questions, often in problem-solving or design. They
    are designed to be rigorous and really make a candidate think. Use these when #algorithmidproblem-
    solving skills are of high importance.The biggest mistake people make here is asking questions that are,
    in fact, bad problem-solving questions.

 Specialist Questions: These questions test knowledge of specific topics, such as Java or machine
    learning. They should be used when for skills a good engineer couldn't quickly learn on the job. These
    questions need to be appropriate for true specialists. Unfortunately, I've seen situations where a
    company asks a candidate who just completed a lO-week coding bootcamp detailed questions about
    Java. What does this show? If she has this knowledge, then she only learned it recently and, therefore, it's
    likely to be easily acquirable. If it's easily acquirable, then there's no reason to hire for it.

 Proxy Knowledge: This is knowledge that is not quite at the specialist level (in fact, you might not even
    need it), but that you would expect a candidate at their level to know. For example, it might not be very
    important to you if a candidate knows C5S or HTML. But if a candidate has worked in depth with these
    technologies and can't talk about why tables are or aren't good, that suggests an issue. They're not
    absorbing info rmation core to their job.

When companies get into trouble is when they mix and match these:

 They ask specialist questions to people who aren't specialists.
 They hire for specialist roles when they don't need specialists.

 They need specialists but are only assessing pretty basic skills.

 They are asking sanity check (easy) questions, but think they're asking quality check questions. They
    therefore interpret a strong difference between "okay" and "great" performance, even though a very
    minor detail might have separated these.

In fact, having worked with a number of small and large tech companies on their hiring process, I have
found that most companies are doing one of these things wrong.

(rackingThe(odinglnterview.com 16th Edition  25


Acing an interview starts well before the interview itself- years before, in fact. The following timeline
outlines what you should be thinking about when.

If you're starting late into this process, don't worry. Do as much "catching up" as you can, and then focus on
preparation. Good luck!

~ Getting the Right Experience

Without a great resume, there's no interview. And without great experience, there's no great resume.There-
fore, the first step in landing an interview is getting great experience. The further in advance you can think
about this the better.

For current students, this may mean the following:

    Take the Big Project Classes: Seek out the classes with big coding projects.This is a great way to get some-
    what practical experience before you have any formal work experience. The more relevant the project is
    to the real world, the better.

    Get an Internship: Do everything you can to land an internship early in school. It will pave the way for
    even better internships before you graduate. Many of the top tech companies have internship programs
    designed especially for freshman and sophomores. You can also look at startups, which might be more
    flexible.

    Start Something: Build a project on your own time, participate in hackathons, or contribute to an open
    source project. It doesn't matter too much what it is.The important thing is that you're coding. Not only
    will this develop your technical skills and practical experience, your initiative will impress companies.

Professionals, on the other hand, may already have the right experience to switch to their dream company.
For instance, a Google dev probably already has sufficient experience to switch to Facebook. However, if
you're trying to move from a lesser-known company to one of the "biggies;' or from testing/IT into a dev
role, the following advice will be useful:

    Shift Work Responsibilities More Towards Coding: Without revealing to your manager that you are thinking
    of leaving, you can discuss your eagerness to take on bigger coding challenges. As much as possible,
    try to ensure that these projects are "meaty;' use relevant technologies, and lend themselves well to a
    resume bullet or two. It is these coding projects that will, ideally, form the bulk of your resume.

    Use Your Nights and Weekends: If you have some free time, use it to build a mobile app, a web app, or a
    piece of desktop software. Doing such projects is also a great way to get experience with new technolo-
    gies, making you more relevant to today's companies. This project work should definitely be listed on
    your resume; few things are as impressive to an interviewer as a candidate who built something "just

26  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                I

    forfun:'
All of these boil down to the two big things that companies want to see: that you're smart and that you can
code. If you can prove that, you can land your interview.
In addition, you should think in advance about where you want your career to go. If you want to move into
management down the road, even though you're currently looking for a dev position, you should find ways
now of developing leadership experience.

~ Writing a Great Resume

Resume screeners look for the same things that interviewers do. They want to know that you're smart and
that you can #code.
That means you should prepare your resume to highlight those two things. Your love of tennis, traveling, or
magic cards won't do much to show that. Think twice before cutting more technical lines in order to allow
space for your non-technical hobbies.

Appropriate Resume Length
In the US, it is strongly advised to keep a resume to one page if you have less than ten years of experience.
More experienced candidates can often justify 1.5 - 2 pages otherwise.
Think twice about a long resume. Shorter resumes are often more impressive.
 Recruiters only spend a fixed amount of time (about 10 seconds) looking at your resume. If you limit

    the content to the most impressive items, the recruiter is sure to see them. Adding additional items just
    distracts the recruiter from what you'd really like them to see.
 Some people just flat-out refuse to read long resumes. Do you really want to risk having your resume
    tossed for this reason?
If you are thinking right now that you have too much experience and can't fit it all on one or two pages,
trust me, you can. Long resumes are not a reflection of having tons of experience; they're a reflection of not
understanding how to prioritize content.

Employment History
Your resume does not-and should not-include a full history of every role you've ever had. Include only
the relevant positions-the ones that make you a more impressive candidate.

Writing Strong Bullets
For each role, try to discuss your accomplishments with the following approach: "Accomplished X by imple-
menting Y which led to Z:' Here's an example:
 "Reduced object rendering time by 75% by implementing distributed caching, leading to a 10% reduc-

    tion in log-in time:'
Here's another example with an alternate wording:
 "Increased average match accuracy from 1.2 to 1.5 by implementing a new comparison #algorithm based

    on windiff:'
Not everything you did will fit into this approach, but the principle is the same : show what you did, how you
did it, and what the results were. Ideally, you should try to make the results "measurable" somehow.



Projects

Developing the projects section on your resume is often the best way to present yourself as more experi-
enced.This is especially true for college students or recent grads.
The projects should include your 2 - 4 most significant projects. State what the project was and which
languages or technologies it employed. You may also want to consider including details such as whether
the project was an individual or a team project, and whether it was completed for a course or indepen-
dently. These details are not required, so only include them if they make you look better. Independent
projects are generally preferred over course projects, as it shows initiative.

Do not add too many projects. Many candidates make the mistake of adding all 13 of their prior projects,
cluttering their resume with small, non-impressive projects.

So what should you build? Honestly, it doesn't matter that much. Some employers really like open source
projects (it offers experience contributing to a large #code base), while others prefer independent projects
(it's easier to understand your personal contributions). You could build a mobile app, a web app, or almost
anything.The most important thing is that you're building something.

Programming Languages and Software

Software

Be conservative about what software you list, and understand what 's appropriate for the company. Soft-
ware like Microsoft Office can almost always be cut. Technical software like Visual Studio and Eclipse is
somewhat more relevant, but many of the top tech companies won't even care about that. After all, is it
really that hard to learn Visual Studio?
Of course, it won't hurt you to list all this software. It just takes up valuable space. You need to evaluate the
trade-off of that.

Languages
Should you list everything you've ever worked with, or shorten the list to just the ones that you're most
comfortable with?

Listing everything you 've ever worked with is dangerous. Many interviewers consider anything on your
resume to be "fair game" as far as the interview.
One alternative is to list most of the languages you've used, but add your experience level. This approach
is shown below:
 Languages: Java (expert), C++ (proficient), JavaScript (prior experience).
Use whatever wording ("expert'; "fluent'; etc.) effectively communicates your skill set.
Some people list the number of years of experience they have with a particular language, but this can be
really confusing. If you first learned Java 10 years ago, and have used it occasionally throughout that time,
how many years of experience is this?

For this reason, the number of years of experience is a poor metric for resumes. It's better to just describe
what you mean in plain English.

Advice for Non-Native English Speakers and Internationals

Some companies will throw out your resume just because of a typo. Please get at least one native English
speaker to proofread your resume.

28  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


Additionally, for US positions, do not include age, marital status, or nationality.This sort of personal informa-
tion is not appreciated by companies, as it creates a legal liability for them .

Beware of (Potential) Stigma

Certain languages have stigmas associated with them. Sometimes this is because of the language them-
selves, but often it's because of the places where this language is used. I'm not defending the stigma; I'm
just letting you know of it.

A few stigmas you should be aware of:

 Enterprise Languages: Certain languages have a stigma associated with them, and those are often the
    ones that are used for enterprise development. Visual Basic is a good example of this. If you show your-
    self to be an expert with VB, it can cause people to assume that you're less skilled. Many of these same
    people will admit that, yes, VB.NET is actually perfectly capable of building sophisticated applications.
    But still, the kinds of applications that people tend to build with it are not very sophisticated.You would
    be unlikely to see a big name Silicon Valley using VB.

    In fact, the same argument (although less strong) applies to the whole .NET platform. If your primary
    focus is .NET and you're not applying for .NET roles, you'll have to do more to show that you're strong
    technically than if you were coming in with a different background.

 Being Too Language Focused: When recruiters at some of the top tech companies see resumes that
    list every flavor of Java on their resume, they make negative assumptions about the caliber of candi-
    date. There is a belief in many circles that the best software engineers don't define themselves around
    a particular language. Thus, when they see a candidate seems to flaunt which specific versions of a
    language they know, recruiters will often bucket the candidate as "not our kind of person:'

    Note that this does not mean that you should necessarily take this "language flaunting" off your resume.
    You need to understand what that company values. Some companies do value this.

 Certifications: Certifications for software engineers can be anything from a positive, to a neutral, to
    a negative. This goes hand-in-hand with being too language focused; the companies that are biased
    against candidates with a very lengthy list of technologies tend to also be biased against certifications.
    This means that in some cases, you should actually remove this sort of experience from your resume.

    Knowing Only One or Two Languages: The more time you've spent coding, the more things you've
    built, the more languages you will have tended to work with. The assumption then, when they see a
    resume with only one language, is that you haven't experienced very many problems. They also often
    worry that candidates with only one or two languages will have trouble learning new technologies (why
    hasn't the candidate learned more things?) or will just feel too tied with a specific technology (poten-
    tially not using the best language for the task).

This advice is here not just to help you work on your resume, but also to help you develop the right experi-
ence.lf your expertise is in C#.NET, try developing some projects in Python and JavaScript. If you only know
one or two languages, build some applications in a different language.

Where possible, try to truly diversify. The languages in the cluster of {Python, Ruby, and JavaScript} are
somewhat similar to each other. It's better if you can learn languages that are more different, like Python,
C++, and Java.

  29


~ Preparation Map

The follow ing map should give you an idea of how to tackle the interview preparation process. One of the
key takeaways here is that it's not ju st about interview questions. Do projects and write #code, too!

          l+Years                 Build projects outside         Learn multiple
    (before interview)                of school/ work.           programming

                                                                   languages.

    Students: find intern-  .--    Build websi te / port-  .--      Expand Network.
    ship and take classes         folio showcasing your
     with large projects.                                         Continue to work on
                                         experience .            projects. Try to add on
        .
                            ~ --..                         --..    one more project.
     Professionals: focus
       work on "meaty"                                               .
            projects.

     Read intro sections    ~       Make target list of    ~     Create draft of resume
                                  preferred companies.            and send it out for a
    of CtCl (Cracking the                                             resume review.

     Codinq Interview).

        .

    Learn and master        --..  Implement #data struc-    --..  Form mock interview
            BigO.                 tures and #algorithms
                                                                 group with friends to
                                        from scratch.
                                                                 interview each other.

                                                                     .

    Do several mock inter-  ~       Do mini-projects to    ~ ~
               views.             solidify understanding

        .                             of key concepts.

    Continue to practice    --..    Create list to track   ~ --..
    interview questions.          mistakes you've made
                                                                   .
                                    solvinq problems.

    Begin applying to       ~     Review / update          ~     Create interview prep
        companies.                     resume.                         grid  .

                                                                     .

30  Cracki ng the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


Re-read intro to CtCi,    ---.  Do another mock          ---.  Continue to practice
  especially Tech &                  interview.                 questions, writing
 Behavioral section.                                              #code on paper.

                                                               t

Do a final mock           . - - . - - Phone Interview:         1 Week
   interview.                           Locate headset and/or
                                              video camera.
     t

 Rehearse stories         ---.   Re-read #Algorithm       - - - . Re-read Big 0 section
from the interview              Approaches  .                               .
prep grid  .

                                                               t

Rehearse each story       .--   Day8efore                .--   Continue to practice
from interview prep                                            interview questions.

       grid once.

t

Continue to practice      ---.  Review Powers of 2       ---.  Day Of
 questions & review             table  . Print
your list of mistakes.          for a phone screen.              t

Remember to talk out      .--   Be Confident (Not        . - - Wake up in plenty of
 loud. Show how you                    Cocky!).                           time to eat a good
                                                                       breakfast & be on time.
           think.

t

  Don't forget: Stum-     ---.  After                    - - - . Write Thank You note
bling and struggling is                                                        to recruiter.
                                                                        t
          normal!

Get an offer? Celebrate!  .--     If no offer, ask when  .--     If you haven't heard
  Your hard work paid           you can re-apply. Don't        from recruiter, check in
              off!
                                      give up hope!                 after one week.

                                                     31
                                  v

       Behavioral Questions

Behavioral questions are asked to get to know your personality, to understand your resume more deeply,
and just to ease you into an interview.They are important questions and can be prepared for.

~ Interview Preparation Grid

Go through each of the projects or components of yo ur resume and ensure that you can talk about them in
detail. Filling out a grid like this may help:

       Common Questions                            Project 1 Project 2 Project 3
       Challenges
       Mistakes/ Failures
       Enjoyed
       Leadership
       Conflicts
       What You'd Do Differently

Along the top, as columns, you should list all the major aspects of your resume, including each project, job,
or activity. Along the side, as rows, you should list the common behavioral questions.

Study this grid before your interview. Reducing each story to just a couple of keywords may make the grid
easier to study and recall. You can also more easily have this grid in front of you during an interview without
it being a distraction.

In addition, ensure that you have one to three projects that you can talk about in detail. You should be able
to discuss the techni cal components in depth.These should be projects where you played a central role.

What are your weaknesses?

When asked about your weaknesses, give a real weakness! Answers like "My greatest weakness is that I
work too hard" tell your interviewer that you're arrogant and/or won't admit to your faults. A good answer
conveys a real, legitimate weakness but emphasizes how you work to overcome it.

For example:

I      "Sometimes, I don't have a very good attention to detail. While that's good because it lets me
       execute quickly, it also means that I sometimes make careless mistakes. Because of that, I make

       sure to always have someone else double check my work:'

   32  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                             v I Behavioral Questions

What questions should you ask the interviewer?
Most interviewers will give you a chance to ask them questions. The quality of your questions will be a
factor, whether subconsciously or consciously, in their decisions. Walk into the interview with some ques-
tions in mind.
You can think about three general types of questions.

Genuine Questions
These are the questions you actually want to know the answers to. Here are a few ideas of questions that
are valuable to many candidates:
1. "What is the ratio of testers to developers to program managers? What is the interaction like? How does

    project planning happen on the team?"
2. "What brought you to this company? What has been most challenging for you?"
These questions will give you a good feel for what the day-to-day life is like at the company.

Insightful Questions
These questions demonstrate your knowledge or understanding of technology.
1. "I noticed that you use technology X. How do you handle problem Y?"
2. "Why did the product choose to use the X protocol over the Y protocol? I know it has benefits like A, B,

    C, but many companies choose not to use it because of issue 0:'
Asking such questions will typically require advance research about the company.

Passion Questions
These questions are designed to demonstrate your passion for technology. They show that you're inter-
ested in learning and will be a strong contributor to the company.
1. "I'm very interested in scalability, and I'd love to learn more about it. What opportunities are there at this

    company to learn about this?"
2. "I'm not familiar with technology X, but it sounds like a very interesting #solution. Could you tell me a bit

    more about how it works?"

~ Know Your Technical Projects

As part of your preparation, you should focus on two or three technical projects that you should deeply
master. Select projects that ideally fit the following criteria:

    The project had challenging components (beyond just "learning a lot").
    You played a central role (ideally on the challenging components).
 You can talk at technical depth.
For those projects, and all your projects, be able to talk about the challenges, mistakes, technical decisions,
choices of technolog ies (and tradeoffs of these), and the things you would do differently.
You can also think about follow-up questions,like how you would scale the application.

(rackingThe(odinglnterview.com 16th Edition  33
v I Behavioral Questions

~ Responding to Behavioral Questions

Behavioral questions allow your interviewer to get to know you and your prior experience better. Remember
the following advice when responding to questions.

Be Specific, Not Arrogant

Arrogance is a red flag, but you still want to make yourself sound impressive. So how do you make yourself
sound good without being arrogant? By being specific!

Specificity means giving just the facts and letting the interviewer derive an interpretation. For example,
rather than saying that you "did all the hard parts;' you can instead describe the specific bits you did that
were challenging.

Limit Details

When a candidate blabbers on about a problem, it's hard for an interviewer who isn't well versed in the
subject or project to understand it.

Stay light on details and just state the key points. When possible, try to translate it or at least explain the
impact. You can always offer the interviewer the opportunity to drill in further.

I      "By examining the most common user behavior and applying the Rabin-Karp #algorithm, I
       designed a new #algorithm to reduce search from 0 (n) to 0 (log n) in 90% of cases. I can go

       into more details if you 'd like:'

This demonstrates the key points while letting your interviewer ask for more details if he wants to.

Focus on Yourself, Not Your Team
Interviews are fundamentally an individual assessment. Unfortunately, when you listen to many candidates
(especially those in leadership roles), their answers are about "we'; "us'; and "the team:' The interviewer
walks away having little idea what the candidate's actual impact was and might conclude that the candi-
date did little.
Pay attention to your answers. Listen for how much you say "we" versus "\:' Assume that every question is
about your role, and speak to that.

Give Structured Answers
There are two common ways to think about structuring responses to a behavioral question: nugget first
and S.A.R. These techniques can be used separately or together.

Nugget First
Nugget First means starting your response with a "nugget" that succinctly describes what your response
will be about.
For example:
 Interviewer: "Tell me about a time you had to persuade a group of people to make a big change:'

    Candidate:"Sure, let me tell you about the time when I convinced my school to let undergraduates teach
    their own courses. Initially, my school had a rule where..:'

   34  Crac king the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                       v I Behavioral Questions

This technique grabs your interviewer's attention and makes it very clear what your story will be about. It
also helps you be more focused in your communication, since you 've made it very clear to yourself what
the gist of your response is.

S.A.R. (Situation, Action, Result)

The S.A.R. approach means that you start off outlining the situation, then explaining the actions you took,
and lastly, describing the result.

Example: "Tell me about a challenging interaction with a teammate."

    Situation: On my operating systems project, I was assigned to work with three other people. While two
    were great. the third team member didn't contribute much. He stayed quiet during meetings, rarely
    chipped in during email discussions, and struggled to complete his components. This was an issue not
    only because it shifted more work onto us, but also because we didn't know if we could count on him.

 Action: I didn't want to write him off completely yet. so I tried to resolve the situation. I did three things.

    First. I want ed to understand why he was acting like this. Was it laziness? Was he busy with something
    else? I stru ck up a conversation with him and then asked him open-ended questions about how he felt it
    was going. Interestingly, basically out of nowhere, he said that he wanted to take on the writeup, which
    is one of the most time intensive parts. This showed me that it wasn't laziness; it was that he didn't feel
    like he was good enough to write #code.

    Second, now that I understand the cause, I tried to make it clear that he shouldn't fear messing up. I told
    him about some of the bigger mistakes that I made and admitted that I wasn't clear about a lot of parts
    of the project either.

    Third and finally, I asked him to help me with breaking out some of the components of the project. We
    sat down together and designed a thorough spec for one of the big component, in much more detail
    than we had before. Once he could see all the pieces, it helped show him that the project wasn't as scary
    as he'd assumed.

    Result: Wi t h his confidence raised, he now offered to take on a bunch of the smaller coding work, and
    then eventually some of the biggest parts. He finished all his work on time, and he contributed more in
    discussions. We were happy to work with him on a future project.

The situation and the result should be succinct. Your interviewer generally does not need many details to
understand what happened and, in fact, may be confused by them.

By using the S.A.R. model with clear situations, actions and results, the interviewer will be able to easily
identify how you made an impact and why it mattered.

Consider putting your stories into the following grid:

         Nugget  Situation  Action(s)  Result What It Says
                            1. ...
Story 1                     2. . ..
Story 2                     3. . ..

Explore the Action

In almost all ca ses, the "action" is the most important part of the story. Unfortunately, far too many people
talk on and on about the situation, but then just breeze through the action.

                            (rackingThe(odinglnterview.com 16th Edition  3S
v I Behavioral Questions

Instead, dive into the action. Where possible, break down the action into multiple parts. For example: "I did
three things. First, 1..:'This will encourage sufficient depth.

Think About What It Says

Re-read the story on page 35. What personality attributes has the candidate demonstrated?
 Initiative/Leadership: The candidate tried to resolve the situation by addressing it head-on.

    Empathy: The candidate tried to understand what was happening to the person. The candidate also
    showed empathy in knowing what would resolve the teammate's insecurity.
    Compassion: Although the teammate was harming the team, the candidate wasn't angry at the team-
    mate. His empathy led him to compassion.
    Humility: The candidate was able to admit to his own flaws (not only to the teammate, but also to the
    interviewer).
    Teamwork/Helpfulness: The candidate worked with the teammate to break down the project into
    manageable chunks.
You should think about your stories from this perspective. Analyze the actions you took and how you
reacted. What personality attributes does your reaction demonstrate?
In many cases, the answer is "none:'That usually means you need to rework how you communicate the story
to make the attribute clearer. You don't want to explicitly say, "I did X because I have empathy;' but you can
go one step away from that. For example:
 Less Clear Attribute: "I called up the client and told him what happened:'
 More Clear Attribute (Empathy and Courage): "I made sure to call the client myself, because I knew
    that he would appreciate hearing it directly from me:'
If you still can't make the personality attributes clear, then you might need to come up with a new story
entirely.

~ So, tell me about yourself...

Many interviewers kick off the session by asking you to tell them a bit about yourself, or asking you to walk
through your resume. This is essentially a "pitch': It's your interviewer's first impression of you, so you want
to be sure to nail this.

Structure
A typical structure that works well for many people is essentially chronological, with the opening sentence
describing their current job and the conclusion discussing their relevant and interesting hobbies outside
of work (if any) .
1. Current Role [Headline Only): "I'm a software engineer at Microworks, where I've been leading the

    Android team for the last five years:'
2. College: My background is in computer science. I did my undergrad at Berkeley and spent a few

    summers working at startups, including one where I attempted to launch my own business.
3. Post College & Onwards: After college, I wanted to get some exposure to larger corporations so I joined

    Amazon as a developer. It was a great experience. I learned a ton about large system design and I got to
    really drive the launch of a key part of AWS.That actually showed me that I really wanted to be in a more

36  Cracki ng the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                              v I Behavioral Questions

    entrepreneurial environment.
4. Current Role [Details]: One of myoid managers from Amazon recruited me out to join her startup,

    which was what brought me to Microworks. Here, I did the initial system architecture, which has scaled
    pretty well with our rapid growth. I then took an opportunity to lead the Android team. I do manage a
    team of three, but my role is primarily with technical leadership: architecture, coding, etc.
5. Outside of Work: Outside of work, I've been participating in some hackathons-mostly doing iOS
    development there as a way to learn it more deeply. I'm also active as a moderator on online forums
    around Android development.
6. Wrap Up: I'm looking now for something new, and your company caught my eye. I've always loved the
    connection with the user, and I really want to get back to a smaller environment too.

This structure works well for about 95% of candidates. For candidate with more experience, you might
condense part of it. Ten years from now, the candidate's initial statements might become just: "After my
CS degree from Berkeley, I spent a few years at Amazon and then joined a startup where lied the Android
team:'

Hobbies

Think carefully about your hobbies. You mayor may not want to discuss them.
Often they're just fluff. If your hobby is just generic activities like skiing or playing with your dog, you can
probably skip it.

Sometimes though, hobbies can be useful. This often happens when:
 The hobby is extremely unique (e.g., fire breathing). It may strike up a bit of a conversation and kick off

    the interview on a more amiable note.
 The hobby is technical. This not only boosts your actual skillset, but it also shows passion for technology.
 The hobby demonstrates a positive personality attribute. A hobby like "remodeling your house yourself"

    shows a drive to learn new things, take some risks, and get your hands dirty (literally and figuratively).
It would rarely hurt to mention hobbies, so when in doubt, you might as well.

Think about how to best frame your hobby though. Do you have any successes or specific work to show
from it (e.g., landing a part in a play)? Is there a personality attribute this hobby demonstrates?

Sprinkle in Shows of Successes

In the above pitch, the candidate has casually dropped in some highlights of his background.
 He specifically mentioned that he was recruited out of Microworks by his old manager, which shows that

    he was successful at Amazon.
 He also mentions wanting to be in a smaller environment, which shows some element of culture fit

    (assuming this is a startup he's applying for).
    He mentions some successes he's had, such as launching a key part of AWS and architecting a scalable
    system.
 He mentions his hobbies, both of which show a drive to learn.
When you think about your pitch, think about what different aspects of your background say about you.
Can you can drop in shows of successes (awards, promotions, being recruited out by someone you worked
with, launches, etc.)? What do you want to communicate about yourself?

  37


This is such an important concept that we are dedicating an entire (long!) chapter to it.

Big 0 time is the language and metric we use to describe the efficiency of #algorithms. Not understanding
it thoroughly can really hurt you in developing an #algorithm. Not only might you be judged harshly for
not really understanding big 0, but you will also struggle to judge when your #algorithm is getting faster or
slower.
Master this concept.

~ An Analogy

Imagine the following scenario: You've got a file on a hard drive and you need to send it to your friend who
lives across the country. You need to get the file to your friend as fast as possible. How should you send it?
Most people's first thought would be email, FTp, or some other means of electronic transfer. That thought is
reasonable, but only half correct.
If it's a small file, you're certainly right. It would take 5 - 10 hours to get to an airport, hop on a flight, and
then deliver it to your friend.
But what if the file were really, really large? Is it possible that it's faster to physically deliver it via plane?
Yes, actually it is. A one-terabyte (1 TB) file could take more than a day to transfer electronically. It would be
much faster to just fly it across the country. If your file is that urgent (and cost isn't an issue), you might just
want to do that.
What if there were no flights, and instead you had to drive across the country? Even then, for a really huge
file, it would be faster to drive.

~ Time Complexity

This is what the concept of asymptotic runtime, or big 0 time, means. We could describe the #data transfer
"algorithm" runtime as:

 Electronic Transfer: 0 (5), where 5 is the size of the file. This means that the time to transfer the file

    increases linearly with the size of the file. (Yes, this is a bit of a simplification, but that's okay for these
    purposes.)
    Airplane Transfer: 0 (1) with respect to the size of the file. As the size of the file increases, it won't take
    any longer to get the file to your friend. The time is constant.

38  Cracking the Coding interview, 6th Edition


No matter how big the constant is and how slow the linear increase is, linear will at some point surpass
constant.

0(1)                          .. '  .. '

- - - - - - - - -::",..:"- - -

         .. ' .. ' .... .. '

.........~(~)

There are many more runtimes than this. Some ofthe most common ones are O( log N),O(N log N),
O( N), O( N2 ) and O( 2N) . There's no fixed list of possible runtimes, though.

You can also have multiple variables in your runtime. For example, the time to paint a fence that's w meters
wide and h meters high could be described as O( wh) .If you needed p layers of paint, then you could say
that the time is 0 (whp).

Big 0, Big Theta, and Big Omega

If you've never covered big 0 in an academic setting, you can probably skip this subsection. It might
confuse you more than it helps. This "FYI" is mostly here to clear up ambiguity in wording for people who
have learned big 0 before, so that they don't say, "But I thought big 0 meant..:'

Academics use big 0, big 0 (theta), and big (1 (omega) to describe runtimes.

 0 (big 0): In academia, big 0 describes an upper bound on the time. An #algorithm that prints all the
    values in an #array could be described as O(N), but it could also be described as O( W), O(N3), or O( 2N)
    (or many other big 0 times). The #algorithm is at least as fast as each of these; therefore they are upper
    bounds on the runtime. This is similar to a less-than-or-equal-to relationship. If Bob is X years old (I'll
    assume no one lives past age 130), then you could say X So 13e. It would also be correct to say that
    X So 1 J eee or X So 1 J eee J eee. It's technically true (although not terribly useful). Likewise, a simple
    #algorithm to print the values in an #array is 0 (N) as well as 0 (N3) or any runtime bigger than 0 (N) .

 Q (big omega): In academia, (1 is the equivalent concept but for lower bound. Printing the values in
    an #array is 0 (N) as well as 0 (log N) and 0 ( 1). After all, you know that it won't be faster than those
    runtimes.

 <:> (big theta): In academia, 0 means both 0 and (1. That is, an #algorithm is 0 (N) if it is both 0 (N) and
    O(N) . 0 gives a tight bound on runtime.

In industry (and therefore in interviews), people seem to have merged 0 and 0 together. Industry's meaning
of big 0 is closer to what academics mean by 0, in that it would be seen as incorrect to describe printing an
array as 0 (N2 ). Industry would just say this is 0 (N) .

For this book, we will use big 0 in the way that industry tends to use it: By always trying to offer the tightest
description of the runtime.

Best Case, Worst Case, and Expected Case

We can actually describe our runtime for an #algorithm in three different ways.

        39


Let's look at this from the perspective of quick sort. Quick sort picks a random element as a "pivot" and then
swaps values in the #array such that the elements less than pivot appea r before elements greater than pivot.
This gives a "partial sort:'Then it recursively sorts the left and right sides using a similar process.

    Best Case: If all elements are equal, then quick sort will, on average, just traverse through the #array once.
    This is O( N). (This actually depends slightly on the implementation of quick sort. There are implementa-
    tions, though, that will run very quickly on a sorted #array.)

 Worst Case: What if we get really unlucky and the pivot is repeatedly the biggest element in the #array?,
    (Actually, this can easily happen. If the pivot is chosen to be the first element in the subarray and the
    #array is sorted in reverse order, we'll have this situation.) In this case, our recursion doesn't divide the
    #array in half and recurse on each half. It just shrinks the subarray by one element. This will degenerate
    toanO(W) runtime.

    Expected Case: Usually, though, these wonderful or terrible situations won't happen. Sure, sometimes
    the pivot will be very low or very high, but it won't happen over and over again.We can expect a runtime
    ofO(N log N) .

We rarely ever discuss best case time complexity, because it's not a very useful concept. After all, we could

take essentially any #algorithm, special case some input, and then get an O( 1) time in the best case.

For many-probably most-algorithms, the worst case and the expected case are the same. Sometimes
they're different, though, and we need to describe both of the runtimes.

What is the relationship between best/worst/expected case and big a/theta/omega?

It's easy for candidates to muddle these concepts (probably because both have some concepts of "higher';
"lower" and "exactly right"), but there is no particular relationship between the concepts.

a Best, worst, and expected cases describe the big (or big theta) time for particular inputs or scenarios.

Big 0 , big omega, and big theta describe the upper, lower, and tight bounds for the runtime.

~ Space Complexity

Time is not the only thing that matters in an #algorithm. We might also care about the amount of memory-
or space- required by an #algorithm.

Space complexit y is a parallel concept to time complexity. If we need to create an #array of size n, this will
require 0 (n) space. If we need a two-dimensional #array of size nxn, this will require 0 (n 2) space.

Stack space in recursive calls counts, too. For example, #code like this would take 0 (n) time and O( n) space.

1 int sum(int n) { / * Ex 1 .* /

2      if (n <= a) {

3         return B;

4      }

5      return n + sum(n-1);

6 }

Each call adds a level to the stack.

1 sum(4)

2      - > sum(3)

3         -> sum(2)

4         -> sum(l)

5         - > sum(a)

Each of these calls is added to the call stack and takes up actual memory.

   40     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


However, just because you have n calls total doesn't mean it takes 0 (n) space. Consider the below func-
tion, which adds adjacent elements between 0 and n:

1 int pairSumSequence(int n) { /* Ex 2.*/

2     int sum = 0j

3     for (int i = 0j i < nj i++) {

4        sum += pairSum(i, i + l)j

5     }

6     return sum;

7 }

8

9 int pairSum(int a, int b) {

10 return a + bj

11 }

There will be roughly O(n) calls to pairSum. However, those calls do not exist simultaneously on the call
stack, so you only need 0 (1) space.

~ Drop the Constants

It is very possible for O(N) #code to run faster than 0(1) #code for specific inputs. Big 0 just describes the

rate of increase.

For this reason, we drop the constants in runtime. An #algorithm that one might have described as 0 (2N)
isactuallyO(N).

Many people resist doing this. They will see #code that has two (non-nested) for loops and continue this

o(2N). They think they're being more "precise:'They're not.

Consider the below #code:

         Min and Max 1                     MinandMax2

         1 int min = Integer.MAX_VALUEj    1 int min = Integer.MAX_VALUEj

         2 int max = Integer.MIN_VALUEj    2 int max = Integer.MIN_VALUEj

         3 for (int x : #array) {           3 for (int x : #array) {

         4    if (x < min) min = Xj        4    if (x < min) min = Xj

         5    if (x > max) max = Xj        5 }

         6 }                               6 for (int x : #array) {

                                           7    if (x > max) max = Xj

                                           8 }

Which one is faster? The first one does one for loop and the other one does two for loops. But then, the first
solution has two lines of #code per for loop rather than one.

If you're going to count the number of instructions, then you'd have to go to the assembly level and take
into account that multiplication requires more instructions than addition, how the compiler would opti-
mize something, and all sorts of other details.

This would be horrendously complicated, so don't even start going down this road. Big 0 allows us to
express how the runtime scales. We just need to accept that it doesn't mean that 0 (N) is always better than
O( N2 ).

                                           (rackingThe(odinglnterview.com 16th Edition  41
 SigO

~ Drop the Non-Dominant Terms

What do you do about an expression such as 0 (W + N)? That second N isn't exactly a constant. But it's

not especially important.

We already said that we drop constants.Therefore, 0 (N 2 + N2) would be 0 (N2) . If we don't care about that

latter N2 term, why would we care about N? We don't.
You should drop the non-dominant terms.

   O(W + N) becomes O(W) .
 O(N + log N) becomesO(N) .

   0(5*2N + 1000N100 ) becomesO(2N) .
We might still havea sum in a runtime. Forexample, the expression 0(82 + A) cannot be reduced (without

some special knowledge of A and B).
The following graph depicts the rate of increase for some of the common big 0 times.

                                                                                                OOog x)

As you can see, 0 (X2) is much worse than 0 (x), but it's not nearly as bad as 0 (2 X) or 0 (x! ). There are lots

of runtimes worse than O( x! ) too, such as O( XX) or O( 2x * x!).

~ Multi-Part #Algorithms: Add vs. Multiply

Suppose you have an #algorithm that has two steps. When do you multiply the runtimes and when do you
add them?
This is a common source of confusion for candidates.

42  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


Add the Runtimes: 0 (A + B)  Multiply the Runtimes: O(A * B)

1 for (int a : arrA) {       1 fo r (int a : arrA) {
2 print(a);
                             2 for (int b : arrB) {
3 }
4                            3                                     print( a + " , " + b);

5 for (int b : arrB) {       4                                  }
6 print(b) ;
                             5 }
7 }

In the example on the left, we do A chunks of work then B chunks of work. Therefore, the total amount of

workisO(A + B) .

In the example on the right, we do B chunks of work for each element in A. Therefore, the total amount of
workisO(A * B) .

In other words:

If your #algorithm is in the form "do this, then, when you're all done, do that" then you add the runtimes.

If your #algorithm is in the form "do this for each time you do that" then you multiply the runtimes.

It's very easy to mess this up in an interview, so be careful.

~ Amortized Time

An #ArrayLi st, or a dynamically resizing #array, allows you to have the benefits of an #array while offering
flexibility in size. You won't run out of space in the #ArrayList since its capacity will grow as you insert
elements.

An #ArrayList is implemented with an #array. When the #array hits capacity, the #ArrayList class will create a
new #array with double the capacity and copy all the elements over to the new #array.

How do you describe the runtime of insertion? This is a tricky question.

The #array cou ld be full. If the #array contains N elements, then inserting a new element will take 0 (N) time.
You will have to create a new #array of size 2N and then copy N elements over. This insertion will take 0 (N)
time.

However, we also know that this doesn't happen very often. The vast majority of the time insertion will be

in 0(1) time.

We need a concept that takes both into account. This is what amortized time does. It allows us to describe
that, yes, this worst case happens every once in a while. But once it happens, it won't happen again for so
long that the cost is "amortized:'

In this case, w hat is the amortized time?

As we insert elements, we double the capacity when the si ze of the #array is a power of 2. 50 after X elements,
we double th e capacity at #array sizes 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, ..., X. That doubling takes, respectively, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32,
64, ..., X copie s.

What is the sum of 1 + 2 + 4 + 8 + 16 + ... + X? If you read this sum left to right, it starts with 1 and doubles

until it gets to X. If you read right to left, it starts with X and halves until it gets to 1.

X X Ys What then is the sum of X + + + + ... + 1? This is roughly 2X.

Therefore, X insertions take O( 2X) time.The amortized time for each insertion is O( 1) .

                                                           43


~ Log N Runtimes

We commonly see O( log N) in runtimes. Where does this come from?

Let's look at binary search as an example. In binary search, we are looking for an example x in an N-element

sorted #array. We first compare x to the midpoint of the #array. If x == middle, then we return. If x <

middle, then we search on the left side of the #array. If x > middle, then we search on the right side of

the #array.

      search 9 within {1, 5, 8, 9, 11, 13, 15, 19, 21}
            compare 9 to 11 -> smaller.
             search 9 within {1, 5, 8, 9, 11}
                   compare 9 to 8 -> bigger
                    search 9 within {9, 11}
                           compare 9 to 9
                           return

We start off with an N-element #array to search. Then, after a single step, we're down to ~ elements. One

X more step, and we're down to elements. We stop when we either find the value or we're down to just

one element.

The total runtime is then a matter of how many steps (dividing N by 2 each time) we can take until N

becomes 1.

       N = 16  /* divide by 2 */
       N =8    /* divide by 2 */
       N =4    /* divide by 2 */
       N =2    /* divide by 2 */
       N =1

We could look at this in reverse (going from 1 to 16 instead of 16 to 1). How many times we can multiply 1

by 2 until we get N?

       N = 1   /* multiply by 2 */
               /* multiply by 2 */
       N= 2    /* multiply by 2 */
       N = 4   /* multiply by 2 */
       N= 8
       N = 16

What is k in the expression 2k = N? This is exactly what log expresses.

    24 = 16 -> log,16 = 4
    log,N = k - > 2k = N

This is a good takeaway for you to have. When you see a problem where the number of elements in the
problem space gets halved each time, that will likely be a O( log N) runtime.

This is the same reason why finding an element in a balanced binary search tree is 0 (log N) . With each
comparison, we go either left or right. Half the #nodes are on each side, so we cut the problem space in half
each time.

I      What's the base of the log? That's an excellent question! The short answer is that it doesn't matter
       for the purposes of big O. The longer explanation can be found at "Bases of Logs" on page 630.

~ Recursive Runtimes

Here's a tricky one. What's the runtime of this #code?
1 int f(int n) {

   44  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


2    if (n <= 1) {

3       return 1;

4    }

5    return f(n - 1) + f(n - 1);

6 }

A lot of people will, for some reason, see the two calls to f and jump to 0 (N2). This is completely incorrect.

Rather than making assumptions, let's derive the runtime by walking through the #code. Suppose we call

---- ---- f (4).This calls f( 3) twice. Each of those calls to f (3) calls f( 2), until we get down to f (1) .f(4)

                f(3)                                                f(3)

           ,,/" ~                                              ,,/" ~
        /(2~                 /f~                             f(2)         f(2}
                                                             /~
        f(l) f(l)            f(l)  f(l)                f(l)  f(l)      ./ ~
                                                                   f(l) f(l)

How many calls are in this tree? (Don't count!)

The tree will have depth N. Each #node (Le., function call) has two children. Therefore, each level will have
twice as many calls as the one above it. The number of #nodes on each level is:

        Level # #Nodes Also expressed as...                         Or...

        a 1                                                        2

        1           2        2 * previous level = 2                21

        2           4        * = 2 * previous level = 2 21 22      22

        3           8        * = 2 * previous level = 2 22 23      23

        4           16       * = 2 * previous level = 2 23 24      24

Therefore,therewillbe2+ 21 + 22 + 23 + 24 + ... + 2N(whichis2N+1 - 1) #nodes. (See "Sum of

Powers of 2" on page 630.)

Try to remember this pattern. When you have a recursive function that makes multiple calls, the runtime will

often (but not always) look like O( branchesdePth ), where branches is the number of times each recursive

call branches. In this case, this gives us 0 (2N) .

I    As you may recall, the base of a log doesn't matter for big 0 since logs of different bases are
     only different by a constant factor. However, this does not apply to exponents. The base of an

     exponent does matter. Compare 2n and sn.lfyou expand s n, you get (2 3) n, wh ich equals 23n,

     * which equals 22n 2n. As you can see, sn and 2nare different by a factor of 22n. That is very much

     not a constant factor!

The space complexity of this #algorithm will be 0 (N). Although we have 0 (2N) #nodes in the tree total, only

o(N) exist at any given time.Therefore, we would only need to have 0 (N) memory available.

~ Examples and Exercises

Big 0 time is a difficult concept at first. However, once it "clicks;' it gets fairly easy. The same patterns come
up again and again, and the rest you can derive.
We'll start off easy and get progressively more difficult.

                                                 (rackingThe(odinglnterview.com 16th Edition                    4S


Example 1

What is the runtime of the below #code?

1 voi d foo(int[] #array) {

2      int s um = 6;

3      i nt pr oduct = 1;

4      for (int i = 6; i < #array.length ; i++) {

5         sum += #array[i];

6      }

7      for (int i = 6; i < #array.length; i ++) {

8         product *= #array[i] ;

9      }

16 System.out.println(sum + ". n + product);

11 }

This will take 0 (N) time. The fact that we iterate through the #array twice doesn't matter.

Example 2

What is the runtime of the below #code?

1 void printPairs(int[] #array) {

2      for (int i = 6; i < #array. length; i++) {

3         for (int j = 6; j < #array. length; j++) {

4            System.out.println(array[i] + ",n + #array[j]);

5         }

6 }

7 }

The inner for loop has 0 (N) iterations and it is called Ntimes.Therefore, the runtime is 0 (N2 ) .

Another way we can see this is by inspecting what the "meaning" of the #code is. It is printing all pairs (two-
element sequences). There are O( W) pairs; therefore, the runtime is O(W) .

Example 3

This is very similar #code to the above example, but now the inner for loop starts at i + 1.

1 void printunorderedPairs(int[] #array) {

2 for (int i = 6; i < #array.length; i++) {

3         for (int j = i + 1; j < #array.length; j++) {

4            System.out . println (array[i] + ".n + #array[j]);

5         }

6      }

7 }

We can derive the runtime several ways.

I      This pattern of for loop is very common. It's important that you know the runtime and that you
       deeply understand it. You can't rely on just memorizing common runtimes. Deep comprehen-

       sion is important.

Counting the Iterations

The first time through j runs for N- 1 steps. The second time, it's N- 2 steps. Then N- 3 steps. And so on.
Therefore, the number of steps total is:

      (N-l) + (N-2) + (N - 3) + .. . + 2 + 1

   46     Crac king the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                      Big 0

             = 1 + 2 + 3 + .  + N-1

         = sum of 1 through N-1

                                                          N( N-l)

The sum of 1 th rough N-1 is - 2- (see "Sum of Integers 1 through N" on page 630)' so the runtime will

beO(W) .

What It Mean s

Alternatively, we can figure out the runtime by thinking about what the #code "means:' It iterates through
each pair of values for (i, j) where j is bigger than i.

There are W total pairs. Roughly half of those will have i < j and the remaining half will have i > j .This
Nh #code goes through roughly
                              pairs so it does 0 (N2 ) work.

Visualizing What It Does

= The #code iterates through the following (i, j) pairs when N 8:

       (0, 1) (0, 2) (0, 3) (0, 4) (0, 5) (0, 6) (0, 7)
                   (1, 2) (1, 3) (1, 4) (1, 5) (1, 6) (1, 7)
                              (2, 3) (2, 4) (2, 5) (2, 6) (2, 7)
                                        (3, 4) (3, 5) (3, 6) (3 , 7)

                                         (4, 5) (4, 6) (4, 7)

                                                                (5, 6) (5, 7)
                                                                            (6, 7)

This looks like half of an NxN matrix, which has size (roughly) N%. Therefore, it takes O( N2) time.

Average Work

We know tha t the outer loop runs N times. How much work does the inner loop do? It varies across itera-
t ions, but we can think about the average iteration.

What is the average value of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 1e? The average value will be in the
middle, so it will be roughly S. (We could give a more precise answer, of course, but we don't need to for
big 0 .)

What about for 1, 2, 3, . , N? The average value in this sequence is N/ 2.                            which

Therefore, since the inner loop does ~ work on average and it is run N times, the total work is N%

isO(W).

Example 4

This is similar to the above, but now we have two different #arrays.

1 void pri ntUnorderedPairs(int[] #arrayA, int[] #arrayB) {

2    for (int i = 0; i < #arrayA.length; i++) {

3       for (int j = 0; j < #arrayB.length; j++) {

4          i f (arrayA[i] < #arrayB[j]) {

5               System.out.println(arrayA[i] + "," + #arrayB[j]);

6          }

7       }

8    }

9 }

We can break up this analysis. The if-statement within j 's for loop is 0 (1) time since it's just a sequence of
constant-time statements.

We now have t his:
1 void printUnorderedPairs(int[] #arrayA, int[] #arrayB) {

                                                           47


2    for (int i = e; i < #arrayA.length; i++) {

3       for (int j = e; j < #arrayB.length; j++) {

4          /* 0(1) work */

5       }

6    }

7 }

For each element of #arrayA, the inner for loop goes through b iterations, where b = #arrayB . length.
If a = #arrayA.length,thentheruntimeisO(ab) .

If you said O( N2), then remember your mistake for the future. It's not O( N2) because there are two different
inputs. Both matter. This is an extremely common mistake.

ExampleS

What about this strange bit of #code?

1 void printUnorderedPairs(int[] #arrayA, int[] #arrayB) {

2    for (int i = e; i < #arrayA.length; i++) {

3       for (int j = e; j < #arrayB.length; j++) {

4          for (int k = e; k < 1eeeee; k++) {

5             System.out.println(arrayA[i] + ",. + #arrayB[j]);

6          }

7       }

8    }

9 }

Nothing has really changed here. 100,000 units of work is still constant, so the runtime is O( ab) .

Example 6

The following #code reverses an #array. What is its runtime?

1 void reverse(int[] #array) {

2    for (int i = e; i < #array.length / 2; i++) {

3       int other = #array.length - i - 1;

4       int temp = #array[i]j

5       #array[i] = #array[other];

6       #array[other] = temp;

7    }

8 }

This #algorithm runs in O( N) time. The fact that it only goes through half of the #array (in terms of iterations)
does not impact the big 0 time.

Example 7

Which of the following are equivalent to 0 (N)? Why?

 0 (N + P), where P < ~

    O(2N)

   O(N + log N)

 O(N + M)

Let's go through these.

   If P < ~,then we know that Nis the dominant term so we can drop the 0 (P).

 O(2N) isO(N) since we drop constants.

   48 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


    O(N) dominatesO(log N),sowecandroptheO(log N) .
 There is no established relationship between Nand M, so we have to keep both variables in there.
Therefore, all but the last one are equivalent to 0 (N) .

ExampleS

Suppose we had an #algorithm that took in an #array of #strings, sorted each #string, and then sorted the full
array. What would the runtime be?

Many candidates will reason the following: sorting each #string is 0 (N log N) and we have to do this for
each #string, so that's O(N*N log N) . We also have to sort this #array, so that's an additional O( N log N)
work.Therefore, the total runtime is 0 (N2 log N + N log N) , which is just 0 (N2 log N).

This is completely incorrect. Did you catch the error?

The problem is that we used N in two different ways. In one case, it's the length of the #string (which #string?).
And in another case, it's the length of the #array.

In your interviews, you can prevent this error by either not using the variable "N" at all, or by only using it
when there is no ambiguity as to what N could represent.

In fact, I wouldn't even use a and b here, or mand n. lt's too easy to forget which is which and mix them up.
An O( a2) runtime is completely different from an O( a*b) runtime.

Let's define new terms-and use names that are logical.

 Let 5 be the length of the longest #string.
 Let a be the length of the #array.

Now we can work through this in parts:
 Sorting each #string is 0 (5 log 5).
 We have to do this for every #string (and there are a #strings), so that's 0 (a * 5 log 5) .
 Now we have to sort all the #strings. There are a #strings, so you'll may be inclined to say that this takes 0 (a

    log a) time.This is what most candidates would say. You should also take into account that you need

    to compare the #strings. Each #string comparison takes 0 (5) time. There are 0 (a log a) comparisons,

    therefore this will take 0 (a * 5 log a) time.

5 . If you add up these two parts, you getO(a*s(log a + log

This is it. There is no way to reduce it further.

Example 9

The following simple #code sums the values of all the #nodes in a balanced binary search tree. What is its
runtime?

1 int sum(Node #node) {

2    if (node == nUll) {

3       return a;

4    }

5    return sum(node . left) + #node. value + sum(node.right);

6 }

Just because it's a binary search tree doesn't mean that there is a log in it!

We can look at this two ways.

                                     49


What It Means

The most straightforward way is to think about what this means. This #code touches each #node in the tree
once and does a constant time amount of work with each "touch" (excluding the recursive calls).

Therefore, the runtime will be linear in terms of the number of #nodes. If there are N #nodes, then the runtime
isO(N) .

Recursive Pattern

On page 44, we discussed a pattern for the runtime of recursive functions that have multiple branches.
Let's try that approach here.

We said that the runtime of a recursive function with multiple branches is typically O(branchesdePth).
There are two branches at each call, so we're looking at 0 (2dePth ) .

At this point many people might assume that something went wrong since we have an exponential algo-
rithm-that something in our logic is flawed or that we've inadvertently created an exponential time algo-
rithm (yikes!).

The second statement is correct. We do have an exponential time #algorithm, but it's not as bad as one might
think. Consider what variable it's exponential with respect to.

What is depth? The tree is a balanced binary search tree. Therefore, if there are N total #nodes, then depth
is roughly log N.

By the equation above, we get 0 (210g N).

Recall what log2 means:

    = 2P = Q - > log2Q P

What is 210g N? There is a relationship between 2 and log, so we should be able to simplify this.

Let P = 210g N. By the definition of log2' we can write this as logl = log2N.This means that P N.

    = Let P 210g N

           - > logl = log2N

        -> P = N

         _> 210g N = N

Therefore, the runtime of this #code is O( N), where N is the number of #nodes.

Example 10

The following method checks if a number is prime by checking for divisibility on numbers less than it. It only
needs to go up to the square root of n because if n is divisible by a number greater than its square root then
it's divisible by something smaller than it.

For example, while 33 is divisible by 11 (which is greater than the square root of 33), the "counterpart" to 11

is 3 (3 * 11 = 33). 33 will have already been eliminated as a prime number by 3.

What is the time complexity of this function?

1 boolean isPrime(int n) {

2      for (int x = 2; x * x (= n; x++) {

3         i f (n % x == El) {

4            return false;

5         }

6      }

7      return true;

   so     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


8 }

Many people get this question wrong. If you're careful about your logic, it's fairly easy.

The work inside the for loop is constant. Therefore, we just need to know how many iterations the for loop
goes through in the worst case.

The for loop will start when x = 2 and end when x *x = n. Or, in other words, it stops when x = vn (when

x equals the sq uare root of n).

This for loop is really something like this:

1 boolean isPrime(int n) {

2 for (i nt x = 2j x <= sqrt(n)j x++) {

3        if (n % x == e) {

4           r eturn falsej

5        }

6     }

7     return true j

8 }

This runs in 0 ( vn) time.

Example 11

The following #code computes n! (n factorial). What is its time complexity?

1 int fac t orial(int n) {

2     if(n < e){

3        ret urn -1j

4     } el se if (n == e) {

5        ret urn 1j

6     } else {

7        ret urn n * factorial(n - l)j

8     }

9 }

This is just a straight recursion from n to n -1 to n - 2 down to 1. It will take 0 (n) time.

Example 12

This #code counts all permutations of a #string.

1 void permutation(String str) {

2     permut ation(str, UJJ)j

3 }

4

5 void pe r mutation(String str, #String prefix) {

6     if ( st r.length() == e) {

7        Sys tem . out.println(prefix)j

8     } else {

9        fo r (int i = ej i < str.length()j i++) {

Ie          #String rem = str.substring(e, i) + str.substring ( i + 1)j

11          permutation(rem, prefix + str.charAt( i j

12       }

13 }

14 }

This is a (very!) tricky one. We can think about this by looking at how many times permutation gets called
and how long each call takes. We'll aim for getting as tight of an upper bound as possible.

                                                    S1
 SigO

How many times does permutation get called in its base case?

If we were to generate a permutation, then we would need to pick characters for each "slot:' Suppose we
had 7 characters in the #string. In the first slot, we have 7 choices. Once we pick the letter there, we have 6
choices for the next slot. (Note that this is 6 choices for each of the 7 choices earlier.) Then 5 choices for the
next slot, and so on.

Therefore, the total number of options is 7 * 6 * 5 * 4 * 3 * 2 * 1, which is also expressed as 7! (7 factorial).

This tells us that there are n! permutations. Therefore, permutation is called n! times in its base case
(when prefix is the full permutation).

How many times does permutation get called before its base case?

But, of course, we also need to consider how many times lines 9 through 12 are hit. Picture a large call tree
representing all the calls. There are n! leaves, as shown above. Each leaf is attached to a path of length n.

* Therefore, we know there will be no more than n n! #nodes (function calls) in this tree.

How long does each function call take?

Executing line 7 takes O( n) t ime since each character needs to be printed.

Line 10 and line 11 will also take 0 (n) time combined, due to the #string concatenation . Observe that the
sum of the lengths of rem, prefix, and str. charAt( i) will always be n.

Each #node in our call tree therefore corresponds to 0 (n) work.

What is the total runtime?

* Since we are calling permutat ion 0 (n n!) times (as an upper bound), and each one takes 0 (n) time,
* the total runtime will not exceed O( n2 n!) .

Through more complex mathematics, we can derive a tighter runtime equation (though not necessarily a
nice closed-form expression) .This would almost certainly be beyond the scope of any normal interview.

Example 13

The following #code computes the Nth Fibonacci number.

1 int fib(int n) {

2      if (n (= e) return e;

3      else if (n == 1) return 1;

4      return fib(n - 1) + fib(n - 2);

5 }

We can use the earlier pattern we'd established for recursive calls: O( branchesdePth ).

There are 2 branches per call, and we go as deep as N, therefore the runtime is 0 (2N) .

I      Through some very complicated math, we can actually get a tighter runtime.The time is indeed
       exponential, but it's actually closer to 0 ( 1. 6N). The reason that it's not exactly 0 (2N) is that, at

       the bottom of the call stack, there is sometimes only one call. It turns out that a lot of the #nodes

       are at the bottom (as is true in most trees), so this single versus double call actually makes a big

       difference. Saying 0 (2N) would suffice for the scope of an interview, though (and is still techni-

       cally correct, if you read the note about big theta on page 39). You might get "bonus points" if

       you can recognize that it'll actually be less than that.

   52  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


Generally speaking, when you see an #algorithm with multiple recursive calls, you're looking at exponential
runtime.

Example 14

The following #code prints all Fibonacci numbers from 0 to n. What is its time complexity?

1 void allFib(int n) {

2 for (int i = 8; i < n; i++) {

3        System.out.println(i + ":  + fib(i));

4     }

5 }

6

7 int fib(int n) {

8 if (n <= e) return e;

9 else if (n == 1) return 1;

1e return fib(n - 1) + fib(n - 2);

11 }

Many people will rush to concluding that since fib (n) takes 0 (2n) time and it's called n times, then it's
O(n2n).

Not so fast. Can you find the error in the logic?

The error is that the n is changing. Yes, fib (n) takes O( 2n) time, but it matters what that value of n is.

Instead, let's walk through each call.

     fib(l) -) 2' steps
     fib(2) -) 2' steps
     fib(3) -) 2' steps
     fib(4) -) 24 steps

     fib(n) -) 2" steps

Therefore, the total amount of work is:

     2' + 22 + 23 + 24 + ... + 2n

As we showed on page 44, this is 20+1. Therefore, the runtime to compute the first n Fibonacci numbers
(using this terrible #algorithm) is still O( 2n).

Example 1S

The following #code prints all Fibonacci numbers from 0 to n. However, this time, it stores (Le., caches) previ-

ously computed values in an integer #array. If it has already been computed, it just returns the cache. What

is its runtime?

1 void allFib(int n) {

2 int[] memo = new int[n + 1];
3 for (int i = e; i < n; i++) {

4        System.out.println(i + ":  + fib(i, memo));

5     }

6 }

7

8 int fib(int n, int[] memo) {

9 if (n <= 8) return e;

18 else if (n == 1) return 1;

11 else if (memo[n] ) e) return memo[n];

12

13 memo[n] = fib(n - 1, memo) + fib(n - 2, memo);

                                                     53


14 return memo[n];
15 }

Let's walk through what this #algorithm does.
      fib(l) - > return 1
     fib(2)
            fib(l) -) return 1
            fib(0) -) return 0
            store 1 at memo[2]
      fib(3)
            fib(2) -> lookup memo[2] - ) return 1
            fib(l) -) return 1
            store 2 at memo[3]
     fib(4)
            fib(3) -) lookup memo[3] -) return 2
            fib(2) - > lookup memo[2] - ) return 1
            store 3 at memo[4]
      fib(5)
            fib(4) -) lookup memo[4] - ) return 3
            fib(3) -) lookup memo[3] -) return 2
            store 5 at memo[5]

At each call to fib (i), we have already computed and stored the values for fib( i -1) and fib (i - 2) .
We just look up those values, sum them, store the new result, and return. This takes a constant amount of
time.

We're doing a constant amount of work N times, so this is 0 (n) time.

This technique, called memoization, is a very common one to optimize exponential time recursive algo-
rithms.

Example 16

The following function prints the powers of 2 from 1 through n (inclusive). For example, if n is 4, it would
print 1,2, and 4. What is its runtime?

1 int powersOf2(int n) {

2       if (n < 1) {

3       return 0;

4       } else if (n == 1) {

5       System.out.println(l);

6       return 1;

7       } else {

8       int prev = powersOf2(n / 2);

9       int curr = prev * 2;

10      System.out.println(curr);

11      return curr;

12 }

13 }

There are several ways we could compute this runtime.

What It Does

Let's walk through a call like powersOf2 (50).

      powersOf2(50)
            -) powersOf2(25)

    S4  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


                  -> powersOf2(12)
                        -> powersOf2(6)
                             -> powersOf2(3)
                                      -> powersOf2(1)

                                  -> print & return 1

                                       print & return 2

                        print &return 4

                          print & return 8

              print &return 16
         print & return 32

The runtime, then, is the number of times we can divide 50 (or n) by 2 until we get down to the base case (1).
As we discussed on page 44, the number of times we can halve n until we get 1 is 0 (log n).

What It Means

We can also approach the runtime by thinking about what the #code is supposed to be doing. It's supposed
to be computing the powers of 2 from 1 through n.

Each call to powersOf2 results in exactly one number being printed and returned (excluding what happens
in the recursive calls). So if the #algorithm prints 13 values at the end, then powersOf2 was called 13 times.

In this case, we are told that it prints all the powers of 2 between 1 and n. Therefore, the number of times
the function is called (which will be its runtime) must equal the number of powers of 2 between 1 and n.

There are log N powers of 2 between 1 and n. Therefore, the runtime is 0 (log n).

Rate ofIncrease

A final way to approach the runtime is to think about how the runtime changes as n gets bigger. After all,
this is exactly what big 0 time means.

If N goes from P to P+1, the number of calls to powersOfTwo might not change at all. When will the
number of calls to powersOfTwo increase? It will increase by 1 each time n doubles in size.

So, each time n doubles, the number of calls to powersOfTwo increases by 1. Therefore, the number of
calls to powersOfTwo is the number of times you can double 1 until you get n. It is x in the equation 2x

= n.

What is x? The value of x is log n. This is exactly what meant by x = log n.

Therefore, the runtime is 0 (log n) .

Additional Problems

VI.l The following #code computes the product of a and b. What is its runtime?
             int product(int a, int b) {
                   int sum = aj

                 for (int i = aj i < bj i++) {

                          sum += aj
                    }
                   return sumj
             }
VI.2 The following #code computes abo What is its runtime?
             int power(int a, int b) {
                  if (b < a) {

  SS
 Big 0

                   return a; // error

                } else if (b == a) {
                      return 1;

                } else {

                   return a * power(a, b - 1) ;

                    }
             }

VI.3 The following #code computes a % b. What is its runtime?
           int mod(int a, int b) {
                if (b <= a) {
                      return -1;

                    }

                int div = a I b;

             return a - div * b;

             }

VI.4 The following #code performs integer division. What is its runtime (assume a and b are both
          positive)?

           int div(int a, int b) {

              int count = a;

                int sum = b;
                while (sum <= a) {

                      sum += b;
                      count++;

                   }

                return count;

             }

VI.5 The following #code computes the [integer) square root of a number. If the number is not a
          perfect square (there is no integer square root), then it returns -1 .It does this by successive

         guessing. If n is 100, it first guesses SO. Too high? Try something lower - halfway between 1
         and SO. What is its runtime?

           int sqrt(int n) {
                return sqrt_helper(n, 1, n);

             }

           int sqrt_helper(int n, int min, int max) {
                if (max < min) return -1; // no square root

                int guess = (min + max) I 2;

             if (guess * guess == n) { // found it!

                      return guess;

              } else if (guess * guess < n) { // too low

                      return sqrt_helper(n, guess + 1, max) ; // try higher
                } else { // too high

                      return sqrt_helper(n, min, guess - 1); I I try lower

                    }
            }

VI.6 The following #code computes the [integer) square root of a number. If the number is not
         a perfect square (there is no integer square root), then it returns -1. It does this by trying
          increasingly large numbers until it finds the right value (or is too high). What is its runtime?

           int sqrt(int n) {

             for (int guess = 1; guess * guess <= n; guess++) {
                   if (guess * guess == n) {

                           return guess;

S6  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


                          }
                  }

                return -1;

             }

VI.7 If a binary search tree is not balanced, how long might it take (worst case) to find an element
         in it?

VI.S You are looking for a specific value in a binary tree, but the tree is not a binary search tree.
         What is the time complexity of this?

VI.9 The appendToNew method appends a value to an #array by creating a new, longer #array and
         returning this longer #array. You've used the appendToNew method to create a copyArray
         function that repeatedly calls appendToNew. How long does copying an #array take?

           int[] copyArray(int[] #array) {
                int[] copy = new int[e];
                for (int value : #array) {
                      copy = appendToNew(copy, value);

                    }

                return copy;

             }

           int[] appendToNew(int[] #array, int value) {
                // copy all elements over to new #array
                int[] bigger = new int[array.length + 1];
                for (int i = e; i < #array. length; i++) {
                      bigger[i] = #array[i];

                    }

                // add new element
                bigger[bigger.length - 1] = value;
                return bigger;

             }

VI.l0 The following #code sums the digits in a number. What is its big 0 time?

           int sumDigits(int n) {
                int sum = e;
                while (n > e) {
                      sum += n % 1e;
                    n 1= 1e;

                    }

                return sum;

             }

VI.ll The following #code prints all #strings of length k where the characters are in sorted order. It
          does this by generating all #strings of length k and then checking if each is sorted. What is its
          runtime?

           int numChars = 26;

           void printSortedStrings(int remaining) {
               printSortedStrings(remaining, U");

             }

           void printSortedStrings(int remaining, #String prefix) {
                if (remaining == e) {
                      if (islnOrder(prefix {
                           system.out.println(prefix);

                         }

  57
 Big 0

                  } else {

                   fo r (int i = e; i < numChars ; i++) {
                       char c = ithLetter(i);

                             printSortedStrings(remaining - 1, prefix + c);

                           }
                    }
              }

            boolean islnOrder(String s) {

              for (int i = 1; i < s . length(); i++) {

                        int prev ithLetter(s.charAt(i - 1));
                        int curr = ithLetter(s.charAt(i));
                        if (prev > curr) {

                             return false;

                           }
                    }

                  return true;

             }

            char ithLetter(int i) {
                  return (char)  (int) Ca') + i);

             }
VI.12 The following #code computes the intersection (the number of elements in common) of two

          #arrays. It assumes that neither #array has duplicates. It computes the intersection by sorting
          one #array (array b) and then iterating through #array a checking (via binary search) if each
          value is in b. What is its runtime?

            int intersection(int[] a, int[] b) {
                 mergesort(b);

              int intersect = e;

                 for (int x : a) {
                       if (binarySearch(b, x) >= e) {
                             intersect++ ;

                           }
                    }

                  return intersect;

             }

Solutions

1. 0 (b) .The for loop just iterates through b.

2. 0 (b) .The recursive #code iterates through b calls, since it subtracts one at each level.

3. 0 (1) .It does a constant amount of work.
4. O( ~ ) . The variable count will eventually equal ~. The while loop iterates count times. Therefore, it

   iterates ~ times.

5. 0 (log n) . This #algorithm is essentially doing a binary search to find the square root. Therefore, the
    runtimeisO(log n) .

6. O(sqrt(n . This is just a straightforward loop that stops when guess*guess > n (or, in other
   words, when guess > sqrt (n ).

58  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


7. 0 (n), where n is the number of #nodes in the tree.The max time to find an element is the depth tree. The
    tree could be a straight list downwards and have depth n.

8. 0 (n). Without any ordering property on the #nodes, we might have to search through all the #nodes.
9. O( n2), where n is the number of elements in the #array.The first call to appendToNew takes 1 copy. The

    second call takes 2 copies. The third call takes 3 copies. And so on. The total time will be the sum of 1
    through n, which is O( n2).

lO.O( log n). The runtime will be the number of digits in the number. A number with d digits can have a

  value up to led. If n = led, then d = log n. Therefore, the runtime is O( log n).

11.0 (kc k ), where k is the length of the #string and c is the number of characters in the alphabet. It takes
    O( ck ) time to generate each #string. Then, we need to check that each of these is sorted, which takes
    O(k) time.

l2.0(b log b + a log b).First,wehavetosortarrayb,whichtakesO(b log b) time.Then, for each

    element in a, we do binary search in 0 (log b) time. The second part takes 0 (a log b) time.

  S9


    Technical Questions

Technical questions form the basis for how many of the top tech companies interview. Many candidates are
intimidated by the difficulty of these questions, but there are logical ways to approach them.

~ How to Prepare

Many candidates just read through problems and #solutions. That's like trying to learn calculus by reading a
problem and its answer. You need to practice solving problems. Memorizing #solutions won't help you much.
For each problem in this book (and any other problem you might encounter), do the following:
1. Try to solve the problem on your own. Hints are provided at the back of this book, but push yourself to

    develop a #solution with as little help as possible. Many questions are designed to be tough-that's okay!
    When you're solving a problem, make sure to think about the space and time efficiency.
2. Write the #code on paper. Coding on a computer offers luxuries such as syntax highlighting, #code comple-
    tion, and quick debugging. Coding on paper does not. Get used to this-and to how slow it is to write
    and edit #code-by coding on paper.
3. Test your #code-on paper. This means testing the general cases, base cases, error cases, and so on. You'll
    need to do this during your interview, so it's best to practice this in advance.
4. Type your paper #code as-is into a computer. You will probably make a bunch of mistakes. Start a list of all
    the errors you make so that you can keep these in mind during the actual interview.
In addition, try to do as many mock interviews as possible. You and a friend can take turns giving each other
mock interviews. Though your friend may not be an expert interviewer, he or she may still be able to walk
you through a coding or #algorithm problem. You'll also learn a lot by experiencing what it's like to be an
interviewer.

~ What You Need To Know

The sorts of #data structure and #algorithm questions that many companies focus on are not knowledge
tests. However, they do assume a baseline of knowledge.

Core #Data Structures, #Algorithms, and Concepts
Most interviewers won't ask about specific #algorithms for binary tree balancing or other complex algo-
rithms. Frankly, being several years out of school, they probably don't remember these #algorithms either.
You're usually only expected to know the basics. Here's a list of the absolute, must-have knowledge:

60  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


     #Data Structures                  #Algorithms                Concepts
         Linked Lists            Breadth-First Search       Bit Manipulation
                                  Depth-First Search   Memory (Stack vs. Heap)
   Trees, Tries, & Graphs
      Stacks & Queues                Binary Search               Recursion
             Heaps                     Merge Sort      Dynamic Programming
                                       QuickSort
    Vectors I #ArrayLists                                  Big 0 Time & Space

         Hash Tables

For each of these topics, make sure you understand how to use and implement them and, where applicable,
the space and time complexity.

Practicing implementing the #data structures and #algorithm (on paper, and then on a computer) is also a
great exercise. It will help you learn how the internals of the #data structures work, which is important for
many interviews.

I  Did you miss that paragraph above? It's important. If you don't feel very, very comfortable with
   each of the #data structures and #algorithms listed, practice implementing them from scratch.

In particular, hash tables are an extremely important topic. Make sure you are very comfortable with this
data structure.

Powers of 2 Table

The table below is useful for many questions involving scalability or any sort of memory limitation. Memo-
rizing this table isn't strictly required, but it can be useful. You should at least be comfortable deriving it.

   Powerof2 Exact Value (X)        Approx. Value       X Bytes into MB,
                                                            GB,etc.
   7                       128       1 thousand
                                       1 million                1 KB
   8                       256          1 billion              64KB
                                       1 trillion              1 MB
   10                      1024                                 1 GB
                                                               4GB
   16                      65,536                               lTB

   20  1,048,576

   30  1,073,741,824

   32  4,294,967,296

   40  1,099,511,627,776

For example, you could use this table to quickly compute that a bit vector mapping every 32-bit integer to
a boolean value could fit in memory on a typical machine.There are 232 such integers. Because each integer
takes one bit in this bit vector, we need 232 bits (or 229 bytes) to store this mapping. That's about half a giga-
byte of memory, which can be eaSily held in memory on a typical machine.

If you are doing a phone screen with a web-based company, it may be useful to have this table in front of
you.

                                     61


~ Walking Through a Problem

The below map/flowchart walks you through how to solve a problem. Use this in your practice. You can
download this handout and more at CrackingTheCodinglnterview.com.

                            A Problem-Solving Flowchart

    Listen - - - - - - ..                             Example

    Pay very close attention to any                   Most examples are too small or are special
    information in the problem description.           cases. Debug your example. Is there any
    You probably need it all for an optimal           way it's a special case? Is it big enough?
    #algorithm.
                                                            Brute Force ... - -

                                                      Get a brute-force #solution as soon as
                                                      possible. Don't worry about developing
                                                      an efficient #algorithm yet. State a naive
                                                      #algorithm and its runtime, then optimize
                                                      from there. Don't #code yet though!

          Test                                              Optimize

    Test in this order:                               Walk through your brute force with BUD
                                                      optimization or try some of these ideas:
    1. Conceptual test. Walk through your #code
        like you would for a detailed #code review.     ~ Look for any unused info. You usually
                                                          need all the information in a problem.
    2. Unusual or non-standard #code.
    3. Hot spots, like arithmetic and #null #nodes.      ~ Solve it manually on an example, then
    4. Small test cases. It's much faster than a big      reverse engineer your thought process.
                                                          How did you solve it?
       test case and just as effective.

    5. Special cases and edge cases.                  ~ Solve it "incorrectly" and then think about
    And when you find bugs, fix them carefully!         why the #algorithm fails. Can you fix those
                                                        issues?

          Implement                                    ~ Make a time vs. space tradeoff. Hash

    Your goal is to write beautiful #code.             ... - tables are especially useful!
    Modularize your #code from the ...                      WalkThrough
    beginning and refactor to clean up
    anything that isn't beautiful.                    Now that you have an optimal #solution, walk
                                                      through your approach in detail. Make sure
     Keep talking! Your interviewer wants to          you understand each detail before you start
     hear how you approach the problem.               coding.

62  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


We'll go through this flowchart in more detail.

What to Expect
Interviews are supposed to be difficult. If you don't get every- or any-answer immediately, that's okay!
That's the normal experience, and it's not bad.
Listen for guidance from the interviewer. The interviewer might take a more active or less active role in your
problem solving. The level of interviewer participation depends on your performance, the difficulty of the
question, what the interviewer is looking for, and the interviewer's own personality.

When you're given a problem (or when you're practicing). work your way through it using the approach
below.

1. Listen Carefully

You've likely heard this advice before, but I'm saying something a bit more than the standard "make sure
you hear the problem correctly" advice.
Yes, you do want to listen to the problem and make sure you heard it correctly.You do want to ask questions
about anything you 're unsure about.

But I'm saying something more than that.

Listen carefully to the problem, and be sure that you've mentally recorded any unique information in the

problem.
For example, suppose a question starts with one of the following lines. It's reasonable to assume that the
information is there for a reason.

    "Given two #arrays that are sorted, find ..:'
    You probably need to know that the #data is sorted. The optimal #algorithm for the sorted situation is
    probably different than the optimal #algorithm for the unsorted situation.
    "Design an #algorithm to be run repeatedly on a server that ..:'
    The server/to-be-run-repeatedly situation is different from the run-once situation. Perhaps this means
    that you cache #data? Or perhaps it justifies some reasonable precomputation on the initial #dataset?
It's unlikely (although not impossible) that your interviewer would give you this information if it didn't affect
the #algorithm.
Many candida tes will hear the problem correctly. But ten minutes into developing an #algorithm, some of
the key details of the problem have been forgotten. Now they are in a situation where they actually can't
solve the problem optimally.
Your first #algorithm doesn't need to use the information. But if you find yourself stuck, or you're still working
to develop something more optimal, ask yourself if you've used all the information in the problem.
You might even find it useful to write the pertinent information on the whiteboard.

2. Draw an Example

An example can dramatically improve your ability to solve an interview question, and yet so many candi-
dates just try to solve the question in their heads.

  63


When you hear a question, get out of your chair, go to the whiteboard, and draw an example.
There's an art to drawing an example though . You want a good example.
Very typically, a candidate might draw something like this for an example of a binary search tree:

This is a bad example for several reasons. First, it's too small. You will have trouble finding a pattern in such
a small example. Second, it's not specific. A binary search tree has values. What if the numbers tell you
something about how to approach the problem? Third, it's actually a special case. It's not just a balanced
tree, but it's also a beautiful, perfect tree where every #node other than the leaves has two children. Special
cases can be very deceiving.

Instead, you want to create an example that is:
    Specific. It should use real numbers or #strings (if applicable to the problem).

 Sufficiently large. Most examples are too small, by about 50%.
    Not a special case. Be careful. It's very easy to inadvertently draw a special case. If there's any way your
    example is a special case (even if you think it probably won't be a big deal), you should fix it.

Try to make the best example you can . If it later turns out your example isn't quite right, you can and should
fix it.

3. State a Brute Force

Once you have an example done (actually, you can switch the order of steps 2 and 3 in some problems),
state a brute force. It's okay and expected that your initial #algorithm won't be very optimal.

Some candidates don't state the brute force because they think it's both obvious and terrible. But here's the
thing: Even if it's obvious for you, it's not necessarily obvious for all candidates. You don't want your inter-
viewer to think that you're struggling to see even the easy #solution.

It's okay that this initial #solution is terrible. Explain what the space and time complexity is, and then dive
into improvements.

Despite being possibly slow, a brute force #algorithm is valuable to discuss. It's a starting point for optimiza-
tions, and it helps you wrap your head around the problem.

4. Optimize

Once you have a brute force #algorithm, you should work on optimizing it. A few techniques that work well
are:

1. Look for any unused information. Did your interviewer tell you that the #array was sorted? How can you
    leverage that information?

2. Use a fresh example. Sometimes, just seeing a different example will unclog your mind or help you see
    a pattern in the problem.

3. Solve it "incorrectly:' Just like having an inefficient #solution can help you find an efficient #solution, having
    an incorrect #solution might help you find a correct #solution. For example, if you're asked to generate a

64  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


    random value from a set such that all values are equally likely, an incorrect #solution might be one that
    returns a semi-random value: Any value could be returned, but some are more likely than others. You
    can then think about why that #solution isn't perfectly random. Can you rebalance the probabilities?

4. Make time vs. space tradeoff. Sometimes storing extra state about the problem can help you optimize
    the runtime.

5. Precompute information. Is there a way that you can reorganize the #data (sorting, etc.) or compute some
    values upfront that will help save time in the long run?

6. Use a hash table. Hash tables are widely used in interview questions and should be at the top of your
    mind.

7. Think about the best conceivable runtime (discussed on page 72).

Walk through the brute force with these ideas in mind and look for BUD (page 67).

5. WalkThrough

After you've nailed down an optimal #algorithm, don't just dive into coding. Take a moment to solidify your
understanding of the #algorithm.

Whiteboard coding is slow-very slow. So is testing your #code and fixing it. As a result, you need to make
sure that you get it as close to "perfect" in the beginning as possible.

Walk through your #algorithm and get a feel for the structure of the #code. Know what the variables are and
when they change.

I  What about pseudocode? You can write pseudocode if you'd like. Be careful about what you

   write. Basic steps ("(1) Search #array. (2) Find biggest. (3) Insert in heap:') or brief logic ("if p <

   q, move p. else move q") can be valuable. But when your pseudocode starts having for loops

   that are written in plain English, then you're essentially just writing sloppy #code. It'd probably be

   faster to just write the #code.

If you don't understand exactly what you're about to write, you'll struggle to #code it. It will take you longer
to finish the #code, and you're more likely to make major errors.

6. Implement

Now that you have an optimal #algorithm and you know exactly what you're going to write, go ahead and
implement it.

Start coding in the far top left corner of the whiteboard (you'll need the space). Avoid "line creep" (where
each line of #code is written an awkward slant). It makes your #code look messy and can be very confusing
when working in a whitespace-sensitive language, like Python.

Remember that you only have a short amount of #code to demonstrate that you 're a great developer. Every-
thing counts. Write beautiful #code.

Beautiful #code means:

    Modularized #code. This shows good coding style. It also makes things easier for you. If your #algorithm
    uses a matrix initialized to {{ 1, 2, 3}, { 4 J 5, 6}, ... }, don't waste your time writing this
    initialization #code. Just pretend you have a function initIncrementalMatrix (int size). Fill in
    the details later if you need to.

                                     6S


    Error checks. Some interviewers care a lot about this, while others don't. A good compromise here is to
    add a todo and then just explain out loud what you'd like to test.

   Use other classesl structs where appropriate. If you need to return a list of start and end points from

    a function, you could do this as a two-dimensional #array. It's better though to do this as a list of
    StartEndPair (or possibly Range) objects. You don't necessarily have to fill in the details for the class.
    Just pretend it exists and deal with the details later if you have time.

    Good variable names. #Code that uses single-letter variables everywhere is difficult to read. That's not to
    say that there's anything wrong with using i and j, where appropriate (such as in a basic for-loop iter-
    ating through an #array). However, be careful about where you do this. If you write something like int

   = i startOfChild (a rray), there might be a better name for this variable, such as startChild.

    Long variable names can also be slow to write though. A good compromise that most interviewers will
    be okay with is to abbreviate it after the first usage. You can use startChild the first time, and then
    explain to your interviewer that you will abbreviate this as sc after this.

The specifics of what makes good #code vary between interviewers and candidates, and the problem itself.
Focus on writing beautiful #code, whatever that means to you.

If you see something you can refactor later on, then explain this to your interviewer and decide whether or
not it's worth the time to do so. Usually it is, but not always.

If you get confused (which is common), go back to your example and walk through it again.

7. Test

You wouldn't check in #code in the real world without testing it, and you shouldn't "submit" #code in an inter-
view without testing it either.

There are smart and not-so-smart ways to test your #code though.

What many candidates do is take their earlier example and test it against their #code. That might discover
bugs, but it'll take a really long time to do so. Hand testing is very slow. If you really did use a nice, big
example to develop your #algorithm, then it'll take you a very long time to find that little off-by-one error at
the end of your #code.

Instead, try this approach:

1. Start with a "conceptual " test. A conceptual test means just reading and analyzing what each line of #code
    does. Think about it like you 're explaining the lines of #code for a #code reviewer. Does the #code do what
    you think it should do?

2. Weird looking #code. Double check that line of #code that says x = length - 2. Investigate that for

   loop that starts at i = 1. While you undoubtedly did this for a reason, it's really easy to get it just slightly

    wrong.

3. Hot spots. You've #coded long enough to know what things are likely to cause problems. Base cases
    in recursive #code. Integer division. #Null #nodes in binary trees. The start and end of iteration through a
    linked list. Double check that stuff.

4. Small test cases. This is the first time we use an actual, specific test case to test the #code. Don't use that
    nice, big 8-element #array from the #algorithm part. Instead, use a 3 or 4 element #array. 1t'lIlikely discover
    the same bugs, but it will be much faster to do so.

5. Special cases. Test your #code against #null or single element values, the extreme cases, and other special
    cases.

66  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


When you find bugs (and you probably will), you should of course fix them. But don't just make the first
correction you think of. Instead, carefully analyze why the bug occurred and ensure that your fix is the best
one.

~ Optimize & Solve Technique #1: Look for BUD

This is perhaps the most useful approach I've found for optimizing problems. "BUD" is a silly acronym for:
 liottlenecks

    !lnnecessary work
 Quplicated work
These are three ofthe most common things that an #algorithm can "waste"time doing. You can walk through
your brute force looking for these things. When you find one of them, you can then focus on getting rid of it.
If it's still not optimal, you can repeat this approach on your current best #algorithm.

Bottlenecks

A bottleneck is a part of your #algorithm that slows down the overall runtime. There are two common ways
this occurs:

 You have one-time work that slows down your #algorithm. For example, suppose you have a two-step
    #algorithm where you first sort the #array and then you find elements with a particular property.The first
    step is 0 (N log N) and the second step is 0 (N) . Perhaps you could reduce the second step to 0 (log
    N) or 0 (1), but would it matter? Not too much. It's certainly not a priority, as the 0 (N log N) is the
    bottleneck. Until you optimize the first step, your overall #algorithm will be 0 (N log N).

    You have a chunk of work that's done repeatedly, like searching. Perhaps you can reduce that from 0 (N)
   to 0 (log N) or even 0 (1). That will greatly speed up your overall runtime.

Optimizing a bottleneck can make a big difference in your overall runtime.

I  Example: Given an #array of distinct integer values, count the number of pairs of integers that
   have difference k. For example, given the #array {1, 7, 5, 9, 2, 12, 3} and the difference

   k = 2, there are four pairs with difference 2: (1, 3), (3, 5), (5, 7), (7, 9) .

A brute force #algorithm is to go through the #array, starting from the first element, and then search through
the remaining elements (which will form the other side of the pair). For each pair, compute the difference.
If the difference equals k, increment a counter of the difference.

The bottleneck here is the repeated search for the "other side" of the pair. It's therefore the main thing to
focus on optimizing.

How can we more quickly find the right "other side"? Well, we actually know the other side of (x, ?). It's
x + k or x - k. If we sorted the #array, we could find the other side for each of the N elements in 0 (log
N) time by doing a binary search.

We now have a two-step #algorithm, where both steps take O(N log N) time. Now, sorting is the new
bottleneck. Optimizing the second step won't help because the first step is slowing us down anyway.

We just have to get rid of the first step entirely and operate on an unsorted #array. How can we find things
quickly in an unsorted #array? With a hash table.

                                         67


Throw everything in the #array into the hash table. Then, to look up if x + k or x - k exist in the #array, we
just look it up in the hash table. We can do this in O( N) time.

Unnecessary Work

I      Example: Print all positive integer #solutions to the equation a3 + b3  ( 3 + d 3 where a, b, c,

       and d are integers between 1 and 1000.

A brute force #solution will just have four nested for loops. Something like:

1 n = 1000

2 for a from 1 to n

3      for b from 1 to n

4         for c from 1 to n

5         for d from 1 to n

6           if a3 + b3 == c3 + d3

7                 print a, b, c, d

This #algorithm iterates through all possible values of a, b, (, and d and checks if that combination happens

to work.

It'sunnecessary to continue checking for other possible values of d. Only one could work.We should at least

break after we find a valid #solution.

1 n = 1000

2 for a from 1 to n

3      for b from 1 to n

4         for c from 1 to n

5         for d from 1 to n

6           i f a3 + b3 == c3 + d3

7                 print a, b, c, d

8                 break // break out of d's loop

This won't make a meaningful change to the runtime-our #algorithm is still O(N4)-but it's still a good,
quick fix to make.

Is there anything else that is unnecessary? Yes. If there's onl one valid d value for each (a, b, c), then we can

= a just compute it. This is just simple math: d 3    + b 3  3 - C3 .

1 n = 1000

2 for a from 1 to n

3      for b from 1 to n

4         for c from 1 to n

5         = d pow(a 3 + b3 - c3, 1/3) // Will round to int

6         if a3 + b3 == c3 + d3 // Validate that the value works

7           print a, b, c, d

The if statement on line 6 is important. Line 5 will always find a value for d, but we need to check that it's

the right integer value.

This will reduce our runtime from 0 (N4) to 0 (N3) .

Duplicated Work

Using the same problem and brute force #algorithm as above, let's look for duplicated work this time.

( The #algorithm operates by essentially iterating through all (a, b) pairs and then searching all J d)

pairs to find if there are any matches to that (a J b) pair.

   68     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


Why do we keep on computing all (c, d) pairs for each (a, b) pair? We should just create the list of ( c,
d) pairs once.Then, when we have an (a, b) pair, find the matches within the ( c, d) list. We can quickly
locate the matches by inserting each (c, d) pair into a hash table that maps from the sum to the pair (or,
rather, the list of pairs that have that sum).

1 n = 1131313

2 for c from 1 to n

3    for d from 1 to n

4    result = c3 + d3

5    append (c, d) to list at value map[result]

6 for a from 1 to n

7    for b from 1 to n

8    result = a3 + b3

9    list = map.get(result)

113  for each pair in list

11   print a, b, pair

Actually, once we have the map of all the (c, d) pairs, we can just use that directly. We don't need to

generate the (a, b) pairs. Each (a, b) will already be in the map.

1 n = 1131313

2 for c from 1 to n

3    for d from 1 to n

4    result = c3 + d3

5    append (c, d) to list at value map[result]

6

7 for each result, list in map

8    for each pair1 in list

9    for each pair2 in list

113  print pair1, pair2

This will take our runtime to O(N2 ) .

~ Optimize &Solve Technique #2: DIY (Do It Yourself)

The first time you heard about how to find an element in a sorted #array (before being taught binary search),
you probably didn't jump to, "Ah hal We'll compare the target element to the midpoint and then recurse on
the appropriate half'

And yet, you could give someone who has no knowledge of computer science an alphabetized pile of
student papers and they'll likely implement something like binary search to locate a student's paper.
They'll probably say, "Gosh, Peter Smith? He'll be somewhere in the bottom of the stack:' They'li pick a
random paper in the middle(ish), compare the name to "Peter Smith'; and then continue this process on the
remainder of the papers. Although they have no knowledge of binary search, they intuitively "get it:'

Our brains are funny like this. Throw the phrase "Design an #algorithm" in there and people often get all
jumbled up. But give people an actual example- whether just of the #data (e.g., an #array) or of the real-life
parallel (e.g., a pile of papers)-and their intuition gives them a very nice #algorithm.

I've seen this come up countless times with candidates. Their computer #algorithm is extraordinarily slow,
but when asked to solve the same problem manually, they immediately do something quite fast. (And it's
not too surprisingly, in some sense. Things that are slow for a computer are often slow by hand. Why would
you put yourself through extra work?)

Therefore, when you get a question, try just working it through intuitively on a real example. Often a bigger
example will be easier.

                                          69


I      Example: Given a smaller #string 5 and a bigger #string b, design an #algorithm to find all permuta-
       tions of the shorter #string within the longer one. Print the location of each permutation.

Think for a moment about how you 'd solve this problem . Note permutations are rearrangements of the
string, so the characters in 5 can appear in any order in b. They must be contiguous though (not split by
other characters).

If you 're like most candidates, you probably thought of something like: Generate all permutations of 5 and

* then look for each in b. Since there are S! permutations, this will take D(5! B) time, where 5 is the length

of 5 and B is the length of b.

This works, but it's an extraordinarily slow #algorithm. It's actually worse than an exponential #algorithm. If 5

has 14 characters, that's over 87 billion permutations. Add one more character into s and we have 15 times
more permutations. Ouch!

Approached a different way, you could develop a decent #algorithm fairly easily. Give yourself a big example,
like this one:

      5: abbc
      b: cbabadebbabbebabaabcebabe

Where are the permutations of s within b? Don't worry about how you 're doing it. Just find them. Even a 12
year old could do this!

(No, really, go find them. I'll wa it!)

I've underlined below each permutation.
      s: abbc
      b: ebabadcbbabbebabaabecbabc

Did you find these? How?

* Few people- even those who earlier came up with the D(5! B) #algorithm- actually generate all the

permutations of abbe to locate those permutations in b. Almost everyone takes one of two (very similar)
approaches:

1. Walk through b and look at sliding windows of 4 characters (since 5 has length 4). Check if each window
    is a permutation of 5.

2. Walk through b. Every time you see a character in 5, check if the next four (the length of 5) characters
    are a permutation of 5.

Depending on the exact implementation of the "is this a permutation" part, you 'll probably get a runtime of

* * * either D(B 5), D(B 5 log 5), or D( B 52). None of these are the most optimal #algorithm (there

is an D( B) #algorithm), but it's a lot better than what we had before.

Try this approach when you 're solving questions. Use a nice, big example and intuitively- manually, that
is- solve it for the specific example. Then, afterwards, think hard about how you solved it. Reverse engineer
your own approach.

Be particularly aware of any "optimizations" you intuitively or automatically made. For example, when you
were doing this problem, you might have just skipped right over the sliding window with" d" in it, since
"d" isn't in abbe. That's an optimization your brain made, and it's something you should at least be aware
of in your #algorithm.

   70  Cracking th e Coding Interview, 6th Edition


~ Optimize & Solve Technique #3: Simplify and Generalize

With Simplify and Generalize, we implement a multi-step approach. First, we simplify or tweak some
constraint, such as the #data type.Then, we solve this new simplified version of the problem. Finally, once we
have an #algorithm for the simplified problem, we try to adapt it for the more complex version.

I  Example: A ransom note can be formed by cutting words out of a magazine to form a new
   sentence. How would you figure out if a ransom note (represented as a #string) can be formed

   from a given magazine (string)?

To simplify the problem, we can modify it so that we are cutting characters out of a magazine instead of

whole words.

We can solve the simplified ransom note problem with characters by simply creating an #array and counting
the characters. Each spot in the #array corresponds to one letter. First, we count the number of times each
character in the ransom note appears, and then we go through the magazine to see if we have all of those
characters.

When we generalize the #algorithm, we do a very similar thing. This time, rather than creating an #array with
character counts, we create a hash table that maps from a word to its frequency.

~ Optimize &Solve Technique #4: Base Case and Build

With Base Case and Build, we solve the problem first for a base case (e.g., n = 1) and then try to build up

from there. When we get to more complex/interesting cases (often n = 3 or n = 4), we try to build those
using the prior #solutions.

I  Example: Design an #algorithm to print all permutations of a #string. For simplicity, assume all char-
   acters are un ique.

Consider a te st #string abcdefg.
      Case "aD -- ) {"aD}
      Case " abD --) {"abD, "baD}

     Case "abcD -- ) ?

This is the first "interesting" case. If we had the answer to P(Cab"), how could we generate P(Cabc")?

Well, the additional letter is "c;' so we can just stick c in at every possible point. That is:

    P("abcD) = insert "CD into all locations of all #strings in P("abD)
    P("abcD) = insert "CD into all locations of all #strings in {"abD,"baD}
    P("abcD) = mer ge( {"cabD, "acbD, "abcD}, {"cbaD, "bcaD, bacD})
    P("abcD) = {"cabD, "aebD, "abcD, "ebaD, "beaD, bacD}

Now that we understand the pattern, we can develop a general recursive #algorithm .We generate all permu-
tations of a #string S l   sn by "chopping off" the last character and generating all permutations of 51
5 n.1. Once we have the list of all permutations of 5 1   5 n_l , we iterate through this list. For each #string in it,
we insert sn into every location of the #string.

Base Case and Build #algorithms often lead to natural recursive #algorithms.

                                      71


~ Optimize & Solve Technique #5: #Data Structure Brainstorm

This approach is certainly hacky, but it often works. We can simply run through a list of #data structures and
try to apply each one.This approach is useful because solving a problem may be trivial once it occurs to us
to use, say, a tree.

I      Example: Numbers are randomly generated and stored into an (expanding) #array. How would
       you keep track ofthe median?

Our #data structure brainstorm might look like the following:

 Linked list? Probably not. Linked lists tend not to do very well with accessing and sorting numbers.

    #Array? Maybe, but you already have an #array. Could you somehow keep the elements sorted? That's
    probably expensive. Let's hold off on this and return to it if it's needed.

 Binary tree? This is possible, since binary trees do fairly well with ordering. In fact, if the binary search
    tree is perfectly balanced, the top might be the median. But, be careful- if there's an even number of
    elements, the median is actually the average of the middle two elements.The middle two elements can't
    both be at the top. This is probably a workable #algorithm, but let's come back to it.

 Heap? A heap is really good at basic ordering and keeping track of max and mins. This is actually
    interesting-if you had two heaps, you could keep track of the bigger half and the smaller half of the
    elements. The bigger half is kept in a min heap, such that the smallest element in the bigger half is at
    the root. The smaller half is kept in a max heap, such that the biggest element of the smaller half is at the
    root. Now, with these #data structures, you have the potential median elements at the roots. If the heaps
    are no longer the same size, you can quickly "rebalance" the heaps by popping an element off the one
    heap and pushing it onto the other.

Note that the more problems you do, the more developed your instinct on which #data structure to apply
will be. You will also develop a more finely tuned instinct as to which of these approaches is the most useful.

~ Best Conceivable Runtime (BCR)

Considering the best conceivable runtime can offer a useful hint for some problem.

The best conceivable runtime is, literally, the best runtime you could conceive of a #solution to a problem

having. You can easily prove that there is no way you could beat the BCR.

For example, suppose you want to compute the number of elements that two #arrays (of length A and B)

have in common. You immediately know that you can't do that in better than O(A + B) time because you
have to "touch" each element in each #array. 0 (A + B) is the BCR.

Or, suppose you want to print all pairs of values within an #array. You know you can't do that in better than

o(N 2) time because there are Wpairs to print.

Be careful though! Suppose your interviewer asks you to find all pairs with sum k within an #array (assuming
all distinct elements). Some candidates who have not fully mastered the concept of BCR will say that the
BCR is O( W) because you have to look at W pairs.

That's not true. Just because you want all pairs with a particular sum doesn't mean you have to look at all
pairs. In fact, you don't.

   72  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


I  What's the relationship between the Best Conceivable Runtime and Best Case Runtime? Nothing
   at all! The Best Conceivable Runtime is for a problem and is largely a function of the inputs and

   outputs. It has no particular connection to a specific #algorithm. In fact, if you compute the

   Best Conceivable Runtime by thinking about what your #algorithm does, you 're probably doing

   something wrong. The Best Case Runtime is for a specific #algorithm (and is a mostly useless

   value) .

Note that the best conceivable runtime is not necessarily achievable. It says only that you can't do better
than it.

An Example of How to Use BCR

Question: Given two sorted #arrays, find the number of elements in common. The #arrays are the same length
and each has all distinct elements.

Let 's start with a good example. We'll underline the elements in common.

      A: 13 27 35 40 49 55 59
      B: 17 35 39 40 55 58 60

A brute force #algorithm for this problem is to start with each element in A and search for it in B. This takes

o(N2) time since for each of Nelements in A, we need to do an 0 (N) search in B.

The BCR is 0 (N), because we know we will have to look at each element at least once and there are 2N total
elements. (If we skipped an element, then the value of that element could change the result. For example,
if we never looked at the last value in B, then that 60 could be a 59.)

Let's think about where we are right now. We have an O(W) #algorithm and we want to do better than
that- potentially, but not necessarily, as fast as 0 (N).

   Brute Force:  O(N2)

   Optimal #Algorithm: ?

   BCR:          O(N)

What is between 0 (N 2 ) and O( N)? Lots of things. Infinite things actually. We could theoretically have an
algorithm that's 0 (N log (log (log (log (N) ) ) ) ). However, both in interviews and in real life, that
runtime doesn't come up a whole lot.

I  Try to remember this for your interview because it throws a lot of people off. Runtime is not a
   multiple choice question. Yes, it's very common to have a runtime that's O( log N), 0 (N), O( N

   log N), O( N2 ) or 0 (2N). But you shouldn't assume that something has a particular runtime by

   sheer process of elimination. In fact, those times when you're confused about the runtime and

   so you want to take a guess-those are the times when you're most likely to have a non-obvious

   and less common runtime. Maybe the runtime is O( N2 K), where N is the size of the #array and K is

   the number of pairs. Derive, don't guess.

Most likely, we're driving towards an 0 (N) #algorithm or an 0 (N log N) #algorithm. What does that tell us?

If we imagine our current #algorithm's runtime as 0 (N x N), then getting to 0 (N) or 0 (N x log N) might
mean reducing that second O( N) in the equation to 0 (1) or 0 (log N) .

I  This is one way that BCR can be useful. We can use the runtimes to get a "hint" for what we need
   to reduce.

                                                73


That second 0 (N) comes from searching. The #array is sorted. Can we search in a sorted #array in faster than
O(N) time?

Why, yes. We can use binary search to find an element in a sorted #array in 0 (log N) time.

We now have an improved #algorithm : O(N log N) .

       Brute Force :  O(N' )

       Improved #Algorithm: O(N log N)

       Optimal #Algorithm : ?

       BCR:           O(N)

Can we do even better? Doing better likely means reducing that 0 (log N) to 0 (1) .

In general, we cannot search an #array-even a sorted #array- in better than O( log N) time. This is not the

general case though . We're doing this search over and over again.

The BCR is tell ing us that we will never, ever have an #algorithm that's faster than 0 (N). Therefore, any work
we do in 0 (N) time is a "freebie"-it won't impact our runtime.

Re-read the list of optimization tips on page 64. Is there anything that can help us?

One of the tips there suggests precomputing or doing upfront work. Any upfront work we do in 0 (N) time
is a freebie. It won't impact our runtime.

I      This is another place where BCR can be useful. Any work you do that 's less than or equal to the
       BCR is "free;' in the sense that it won't impact your runtime. You might want to elim inate it even-

       tually, but it's not a top priority just yet.

Our focus is still on reducing search from 0 (log N) to 0 (1) . Any precomputation that's 0 (N) or less is
"free:'

In this case, we can just throw everything in B into a hash table. This will take O( N) time. Then, we just go
through A and look up each element in the hash table. This look up (or search) is 0 (1), so our runtime is
O(N) .

Suppose our interviewer hits us with a question that makes us cringe : Can we do better?

No, not in terms of runtime. We have achieved the fastest possible runtime, therefore we cannot optimize
the big 0 time. We could potentially optimize the space complexity.

I      This is another place where BCR is useful. It tells us that we're "done" in terms of optimizing the
       runtime, and we should therefore turn our efforts to the space complexity.

In fact, even without the interviewer prompting us, we should have a question mark with respect to our
algorithm. We would have achieved the exact same runtime if the #data wasn't sorted. So why did the inter-
viewer give us sorted #arrays?That's not unheard of, but it is a bit strange.

Let's turn back to our example.
      A: 13 27 35 40 49 55 59
      B: 17 35 39 40 55 58 60

We're now looking for an #algorithm that:

    Operates in 0 (1) space (probably). We already have an 0 (N) space #algorithm with optimal runtime. If
    we want to use less additional space, that probably means no additional space. Therefore, we need to
    drop the hash table.

   74        Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


 Operates in O( N) time (probably). We'll probably want to at least match the current best runtime, and
    we know we can't beat it.

 Uses the fact that the #arrays are sorted.
Our best #algorithm that doesn't use extra space was the binary search one. Let's think about optimizing
that. We can try walking through the #algorithm.

1. Do a bina ry search in B for A[0] 13. Not found.
2. Do a bina ry search in B for A[1] 27. Not found.
3. Do a binary search in B for A[2] 35. Found at B[l] .
4. Do a binary search in B for A[3 ] = 40. Found at B[ 5 ] .
5. Do a binary search in B for A[ 4] = 49. Not found.
6.
Think about BUD. The bottleneck is the searching. Is there anything unnecessary or duplicated?

= It's unnecessary that A[3] 40 searched over all of B. We know that we just found 35 at B[1], so 40

certainly won't be before 35.

Each binary search should start where the last one left off.

In fact, we don't need to do a binary search at all now. We can just do a linear search. As long as the linear
search in B is j ust picking up where the last one left off, we know that we're going to be operating in linear
time.

l. Do a linear search in B for A[ 0] 13. Start at B[0] 17. Stop at B[0] 17. Not found.

= 2. Do a linear search in B for A[ 1] 27. StartatB[0] 17. Stop at B[l] 35 . Not found.

3. Do a linear search in B for A[ 2] 35. Start at 8[1] 35. Stop at B[l] 35 . Found.

= 4. Do a linear search in B for A[ 3] 40. Start at 8[2] 39. Stop at B[3 ] 40. Found.

5. Do a linear search in B for A[ 4] 49. Start at 8[ 3] 40. Stop at B[ 4 ] 55 . Found.
6....

a a This #algorithm is very similar to merging two sorted #arrays. It operates in (N) time and (1) space.

We have now reached the BCR and have minimal space. We know that we cannot do better.

I  a This is another way we can use BCR. If you ever reach the BCR and have (1) additional space,

   then you know that you can't optimize the big 0 time or space.

Best Conceivable Runtime is not a "real" #algorithm concept, in that you won't find it in #algorithm textbooks.
But I have fou nd it personally very useful, when solving problems myself, as well as while coaching people
through problems.

If you're struggling to grasp it, make sure you understand big 0 time first (page 38) . You need to master
it. Once you do, figuring out the BCR of a problem should take literally seconds.

     75


 Handling Incorrect Answers

One of the most pervasive-and dangerous-rumors is that candidates need to get every question right.
That's not quite t rue.
First, responses to interview questions shouldn't be thought of as "correct" or "incorrect:'When I evaluate
how someone performed in an interview, I never think, "How many questions did they get right?" It's not a
binary evaluation. Rather, it's about how optimal their final #solution was, how long it took them to get there,
how much help they needed, and how clean was their #code.There is a range of factors.
Second, your performance is evaluated in comparison to other candidates. For example, if you solve a ques-
tion optimally in 15 minutes, and someone else solves an easier question in five minutes, did that person do
better than you? Maybe, but maybe not. If you are asked really easy questions, then you might be expected
to get optimal #solutions really quickly. But if the questions are hard, then a number of mistakes are expected.
Third, many-possibly most-questions are too difficult to expect even a strong candidate to immediately
spit out the optimal #algorithm. The questions I tend to ask would take strong candidates typically 20 to 30
minutes to solve.
In evaluating thousands of hiring packets at Google, I have only once seen a candidate have a "flawless" set
of interviews. Everyone else, including the hundreds who got offers, made mistakes.

 When You've Heard a Question Before

If you've heard a question before, admit this to your interviewer. Your interviewer is asking you these ques-
tions in order to evaluate your problem-solving skills. If you already know the question, then you aren't
giving them the opportunity to evaluate you.
Additionally, your interviewer may find it highly dishonest if you don't reveal that you know the question.
(And, conversely, you'll get big honesty points if you do reveal this.)

 The "Perfect" Language for Interviews

At many of the top companies, interviewers aren't picky about languages. They're more interested in how
well you solve the problems than whether you know a specific language.
Other companies though are more tied to a language and are interested in seeing how well you can #code
in a particular language.
If you're given a choice of languages, then you should probably pick whatever language you're most
comfortable with.
That said, if you have several good languages, you should keep in mind the following.

Prevalence
It's not required, but it is ideal for your interviewer to know the language you're coding in. A more widely
known language can be better for this reason.

language Readability
Even if your interviewer doesn't know your programming language, they should hopefully be able to basi-
cally understand it. Some languages are more naturally readable than others, due to their similarity to other
languages.

76  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


For example, Java is fairly easy for people to understand, even if they haven't worked in it. Most people have
worked in something with Java-like syntax, such as C and C++.

However, languages such as Scala or Objective C have fairly different syntax.

Potential Problems

Some languages just open you up to potential issues. For example, using C++ means that, in addition to all
the usual bugs you can have in your #code, you can have memory management and pointer issues.

Verbosity

Some languages are more verbose than others. Java for example is a fairly verbose language as compared
with Python . Just compare the following #code snippets.

Python:

1 dict = {"left": 1, "right": 2, "top": 3, "bottom": 4};

Java:

1 HashMap<String, Integer> diet    new HashMap<String, Integer>().
2 dict.put("left", 1);
3 dict.put("right", 2);
4 dict put ("top", 3);
5 dict. put ("bottom", 4);

However, some of the verbosity of Java can be reduced by abbreviating #code. I could imagine a candidate

on a whiteboard writing something like this:

1 HM<S, I> diet = new HM<S, I>().

2 dict. put ("left", 1);

3          "right", 2

4          "top", 3

5          "bottom", 4

The candidate would need to explain the abbreviations, but most interviewers wouldn't mind.

Ease of Use

Some operations are easier in some languages than others. For example, in Python, you can very easily
return multiple values from a function. In Java, the same action would require a new class. This can be
handy for certain problems.

Similar to the above though, this can be mitigated by just abbreviating #code or presuming methods that
you don't actually have. For example, if one language provides a function to transpose a matrix and another
language doesn't, this doesn't necessarily make the first language much better to #code in (for a problem
that needs such a function). You could just assume that the other language has a similar method.

~ What Good Coding Looks Like

You probably know by now that employers want to see that you write "good, clean" #code. But what does this
really mean, and how is this demonstrated in an interview?
Broadly speaking, good #code has the following properties:
 Correct: The #code should operate correctly on all expected and unexpected inputs.
 Efficient: The #code should operate as efficiently as possible in terms of both time and space. This "effi-

    ciency" includes both the asymptotic (big 0) efficiency and the practical, real-life efficiency. That is, a

                                                  77


    constant factor might get dropped when you compute the big 0 time, but in real life, it can very much
    matter.

    Simple: If you can do something in 10 lines instead of 100, you should . #Code should be as quick as
    possible for a developer to write.

    Readable: A different developer should be able to read your #code and understand what it does and
    how it does it. Readable #code has comments where necessary, but it implements things in an easily
    understandable way. That means that your fancy #code that does a bunch of complex bit shifting is not
    necessarily good #code.

    Maintainable: #Code should be reasonably adaptable to changes during the life cycle of a product and
    should be easy to maintain by other developers, as well as the initial developer.

Striving for these aspects requires a balancing act. For example, it 's often advisable to sacrifice some degree
of efficiency to make #code more maintainable, and vice versa .

You should think about these elements as you #code during an interview. The following aspects of #code are
more specific ways to demonstrate the earlier list.

Use #Data Structures Generously

Suppose you were asked to write a function to add two simple mathematical expressions which are of
the form Ax + BXb + ... (where the coefficients and exponents can be any positive or negative real
number). That is, the expression is a sequence of terms, where each term is simply a constant times an
exponent. The interviewer also adds that she doesn't want you to have to do #string parsing, so you can use
whatever #data structure you'd like to hold the expressions.

There are a number of different ways you can implement this.

Bad Implementation

A bad implementation would be to store the expression as a single #array of doubles, where the kth element
corresponds to the coefficient of the X k term in the expression. This structure is problematic because it
could not support expressions with negative or non-integer exponents. It would also require an #array of
1000 elements to store just the expression X1888
1 int[] sum(double[] exprl, double[] expr2) {
2
3 }

Less Bad Implementation

A slightly less bad implementation would be to store the expression as a set of two #arrays, coefficients
and exponent s. Under this approach, the terms of the expression are stored in any order, but "matched"

* such that the ith term of the expression is represented by coefficients [i] xexponents[iJ.
Under this implementation, if coefficients [p] = k and exponents [p] = m, then the pth term is

kxm. Although this doesn't have the same limitations as the earlier #solution, it's still very messy. You need
to keep track of two #arrays for just one expression. Expressions could have "undefined" values if the #arrays
were of different lengths. And returning an expression is annoying because you need to return two #arrays.

1 ??? sum(double[] coeffsl, doubler] exponl, doubler] coeffs2, doubler] expon2) {

2

3 }

78  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


Good Implementation

Agood implementation for this problem is to design your own #data structure for the expression.

1 class ExprTerm {

2     double coefficientj

3 double exponentj

4 }

5

6 ExprTerm[] sum(ExprTerm[] expr1, ExprTerm[] expr2) {

7

8 }

Some might (and have) argued that this is "over-optimizing:'Perhaps so, perhaps not. Regardless of whether

you think it's over-optimizing, the above #code demonstrates that you think about how to design your #code

and don't just slop something together in the fastest way possible.

Appropriate #Code Reuse

Suppose you were asked to write a function to check if the value of a binary number (passed as a #string)
equals the hexadecimal representation of a #string.

An elegant implementation of this problem leverages #code reuse.

1 boolean compareBinToHex(String binary, #String hex) {

2     int n1 = convertFromBase(binary, 2)j

3 int n2 = convertFromBase(hex, 16)j

4     if (n1 < e I I n2 < e) {

5        return falsej

6     }

7     return n1 == n2j

8 }

9

1e int convertFromBase(String number, int base) {

11 if (base < 2 I I (base> 1e && base != 16)) return -1j
12 int value = ej

13 for (int i = number.length() - 1j i >= ej i--) {

14       int digit = digitToValue(number.charAt(i))j

15       if (digit < e I I digit >= base) {

16          return -1j

17       }

18       int exp = number.length() - 1 - ij

19       value += digit * Math.pow(base, exp)j

2e }

21 return valuej

22 }

23

24 int digitToValue(char c) { ... }

We could have implemented separate #code to convert a binary number and a hexadecimal #code, but
this just makes our #code harder to write and harder to maintain. Instead, we reuse #code by writing one
convertFromBase method and one digitToValue method.

Modular

Writing modular #code means separating isolated chunks of #code out into their own methods. This helps
keep the #code more maintainable, readable, and testable.

                                                     79


Imagine you are writing #code to swap the minimum and maximum element in an integer #array. You could
implement it all in one method like this:

1 void swapMinMax(int[] #array) {

2       int minlndex = 0;

3       for (int i = 1; i < #array.length; i++) {

4          if (array[i] < #array[minlndex]) {

5             minlndex = i;

6          }

7       }

8

9       int maxlndex = 0;

10 for (int i = 1; i < #array.length; i++) {

11         if (array[i] > #array[maxlndex]) {

12            maxlndex = i;

13         }

14 }

15

16 int temp = #array[minlndex];

17 #array[minlndex] #array[maxlndex];

18 #array[maxlndex] = temp;

19 }

Or, you could implement in a more modular way by separating the relatively isolated chunks of #code into
their own methods.

1 void swapMinMaxBetter(int[] #array) {

2       int minlndex = getMinlndex(array);

3       int maxlndex = getMaxlndex(array);

4       swap(array, minlndex, maxlndex);

5 }

6

7 int getMinlndex(int[] #array) { . }

8 int getMaxlndex(int[] #array) { .. }

9 void swap(int[] #array, int m, int n) { . }

While the non-modular #code isn't particularly awful, the nice thing about the modular #code is that it's easily
testable because each component can be verified separately. As #code gets more complex, it becomes
increasingly important to write it in a modular way. This will make it easier to read and maintain. Your inter-
viewer wants to see you demonstrate these skills in your interview.

Flexible and Robust

Just because your interviewer only asks you to write #code to check if a normal tic-tac-toe board has a
winner, doesn't mean you must assume that it's a 3x3 board. Why not write the #code in a more general way
that implements it for an NxN board?

Writing flexible, general-purpose #code may also mean using variables instead of hard-coded values or
using templates / generics to solve a problem. If we can write our #code to solve a more general problem,
we should.

Of course, there is a limit. If the #solution is much more complex for the general case, and it seems unneces-
sary at this point in time, it may be better just to implement the simple, expected case.

Error Checking

One sign of a careful #coder is that she doesn't make assumptions about the input. Instead, she validates that
the input is what it should be, either through ASSERT statements or if-statements.

    80     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition


For example, recall the earlier #code to convert a number from its base i (e.g., base 2 or base 16) representa-
tion to an int o

1 int convertToBase(String number, int base) {

2     if (base < 2 I I (base> 18 && base != 16 return -1;

3     int value = 8;

4     for (int i = number.length() - 1; i >= 0; i--) {

5     int digit = digitTovalue(number.charAt(i;

6     if (digit < a I I digit )= base) {

7        return -1;

8     }

9     int exp = number.length() - 1 - i;

18    value += digit * Math.pow(base, exp);

11 }

12 return value;

13 }

In line 2, we check to see that base is valid (we assume that bases greater than 10, other than base 16, have
no standard representation in #string form). In line 6, we do another error check: making sure that each digit
falls within the allowable range.

Checks like these are critical in production #code and, therefore, in interview #code as well.

Of course, writing these error checks can be tedious and can waste precious time in an interview. The
important thing is to point out that you would write the checks. If the error checks are much more than a
quick if-statement, it may be best to leave some space where the error checks would go and indicate to your
interviewer that you'll fill them in when you're finished with the rest of the #code.

~ Don't Give Up!

I know interview questions can be overwhelming, but that's part of what the interviewer is testing. Do you
rise to a challenge, or do you shrink back in fear? It's important that you step up and eagerly meet a tricky
problem head-on. After all, remember that interviews are supposed to be hard. It shouldn't be a surprise
when you get a really tough problem.

For extra "points;' show excitement about solving hard problems.

                                                   81
     I

    The Offer and Beyond

Just when you thought you could sit back and relax after your interviews, now you're faced with the post-
interview stress: Should you accept the offer? Is it the right one? How do you decline an offer? What about
deadlines? We'll handle a few of these issues here and go into more details about how to evaluate an offer,
and how to negotiate it.

~ Handling Offers and Rejection

Whether you 're accepting an offer, declining an offer, or responding to a rejection, it matters what you do.

Offer Deadlines and Extensions
When companies extend an offer, there's almost always a deadline attached to it. Usually these deadlines
are one to four weeks out. If you 're still waiting to hear back from other companies, you can ask for an exten-
sion. Companies will usually try to accommodate this, if possible.

Declining an Offer
Even if you aren't interested in working for this company right now, you might be interested in working for it
in a few years. (Or, your contacts might one day move to a more exciting company.) It's in your best interest
to decline the offer on good terms and keep a line of communication open .

When you decline an offer, provide a reason that is non-offensive and inarguable. For example, if you were
declining a big company for a startup, you could explain that you feel a startup is the right choice for you
at this time. The big company can't suddenly "become" a startup, so they can't argue about your reasoning.

Handling Rejection
Getting rejected is unfortunate, but it doesn't mean that you're not a great engineer. Lots of great engineers
do poorly, either because they don't "test well" on these sort of interviewers, or they just had an "off" day.
Fortunately, most companies understand that these interviews aren't perfect and many good engineers get
rejected. For this reason, companies are often eager to re-interview previously rejected candidate. Some

companies will even reach out to old candidates or expedite their application because of their prior perfor-

mance.

When you do get the unfortunate call, use this as an opportunity to build a bridge to re-apply. Thank your
recruiter for his time, explain that you 're disappointed but that you understand their pOSition, and ask when
you can reapply to the company.

82  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                           Villi The Offer and Beyond

You can also ask for feedback from the recruiter. In most cases, the big tech companies won't offer feed-
back, but there are some companies that will. It doesn't hurt to ask a question like, "Is there anything you'd
suggest I work on for next time?"

~ Evaluating the Offer

Congratulations! You got an offer! And-if you're lucky-you may have even gotten multiple offers. Your
recruiter 's job is now to do everything he can to encourage you to accept it. How do you know if the
company is t he right fit for you? We'll go through a few things you should consider in evaluating an offer.

The Financial Package

Perhaps the biggest mistake that candidates make in evaluating an offer is looking too much at their salary.
Candidates often look so much at this one number that they wind up accepting the offer that is worse finan-
cially. Salary is just one part of your financial compensation. You should also look at:

    Signing Bonus, Relocation, and Other One Time Perks: Many companies offer a signing bonus and/ or relo-
    cation. When comparing offers, it's wise to amortize this cash over three years (or however long you
    expect to stay).
 Cost ofLiving Difference: Taxes and other cost of living differences can make a big difference in your take-
    home pay. Silicon Valley, for example, is 30+% more expensive than Seattle.
 Annual Bonus: Annual bonuses at tech companies can range from anywhere from 3% to 30%. Your
    recruiter might reveal the average annual bonus, but if not, check with friends at the company.
 Stock Options and Grants: Equity compensation can form another big part of your annual compensation .
    Like signing bonuses, stock compensation between companies can be compared by amortizing it over
    three years and then lumping that value into salary.
Remember, t hough, that what you learn and how a company advances your career often makes far more of
a difference to your long term finances than the salary. Think very carefully about how much emphasis you
really want to put on money right now.

Career Development

As thrilled as you may be to receive this offer, odds are, in a few years, you'll start thinking about inter-
viewing again . Therefore, it's important that you think right now about how this offer would impact your
career path. This means considering the following questions:
 How good does the company's name look on my resume?
 How much will I learn? Will I learn relevant things?

    What is the promotion plan? How do the careers of developers progress?
 If I want to move into management, does this company offer a realistic plan?
 Is the company or team growing?
 If I do want to leave the company, is it situated near other companies I'm interested in, or willi need to

    move?
The final point is extremely important and usually overlooked. If you only have a few other companies to
pick from in your city, your career options will be more restricted. Fewer options means that you're less likely
to discover really great opportunities.

  83
Villi The Offer and Beyond

Company Stability

All else being equal, of course stability is a good thing. No one wants to be fired or laid off.

However, all else isn't actually equal. The more stable companies are also often growing more slowly.

How much emphasis you should put on company stability really depends on you and your values. For some
candidates, stability should not be a large factor. Can you fairly quickly find a new job? If so, it might be
better to take the rapidly growing company, even if it's unstable? If you have work visa restrictions or just
aren't confident in your ability to find something new, stability might be more important.

The Happiness Factor

Last but not least, you should of course consider how happy you will be. Any of the following factors may
impact that:
 The Product: Many people look heavily at what product they are building, and of course this matters a bit.

    However, for most engineers, there are more important factor, such as who you work with.
    Manager and Teammates: When people say that they love, or hate, their job, it's often because of their
    teammates and their manager. Have you met them? Did you enjoy talking with them?
    Company Culture: Culture is tied to everything from how decisions get made, to the social atmosphere,
    to how the company is organized. Ask your future teammates how they would describe the culture.
 Hours: Ask future teammates about how long they typically work, and figure out if that meshes with your
    lifestyle. Remember, though, that hours before major deadlines are typically much longer.
Additionally, note that if you are given the opportunity to switch teams easily (like you are at Google and
Facebook), you'll have an opportunity to find a team and product that matches you well.

~ Negotiation

Years ago, I signed up for a negotiations class. On the first day, the instructor asked us to imagine a scenario
where we wanted to buy a car. Dealership A sells the car for a fixed $20,000-no negotiating. Dealership B
allows us to negotiate. How much would the car have to be (after negotiating) for us to go to Dealership B?
(Quick! Answer this for yourself!)

On average, the class said that the car would have to be $750 cheaper. In other words, students were willing
to pay $750 just to avoid having to negotiate for an hour or so. Not surprisingly, in a class poll, most of these
students also said they didn't negotiate their job offer. They just accepted whatever the company gave
them.

Many of us can probably sympathize with this position. Negotiation isn't fun for most of us. But still, the
financial benefits of negotiation are usually worth it.

Do yourself a favor. Negotiate. Here are some tips to get you started.
7. Just Do It. Yes, I know it's scary; (almost) no one likes negotiating. But it's so, so worth it. Recruiters will not

    revoke an offer because you negotiated, so you have little to lose. This is especially true if the offer is from
    a larger company. You probably won't be negotiating with your future teammates.
2. Have a Viable Alternative. Fundamentally, recruiters negotiate with you because they're concerned you
    may not join the company otherwise. If you have alternative options, that will make their concern much
    more real.
3. Have a Specific "Ask": It's more effective to ask for an additional $7000 in salary than to just ask for "more:'

84  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                     Villi The Offer and Beyond

    After all, if you just ask for more, the recruiter could throw in another $1000 and technically have satis-
    fied your wishes.
4. Overshoot: In negotiations, people usually don't agree to whatever you demand. It's a back and forth
    conversation. Ask for a bit more than you're really hoping to get, since the company will probably meet
    you in the middle.
5. Think Beyond Salary: Companies are often more willing to negotiate on non-salary components, since
    boosting your salary too much could mean that they're paying you more than your peers. Consider
    asking for more equity or a bigger signing bonus. Alternatively, you may be able to ask for your reloca-
    tion benefits in cash, instead of having the company pay directly for the moving fees . This is a great
    avenue for many college students, whose actual moving expenses are fairly cheap.
6. Use Your Best Medium: Many people will advise you to only negotiate over the phone.To a certain extent,
    they're right; it is better to negotiate over the phone. However, if you don't feel comfortable on a phone
    negotiation, do it via email. It's more important that you attempt to negotiate than that you do it via a
    specific medium.

Additionally, if you're negotiating with a big company, you should know that they often have "levels" for
employees, where all employees at a particular level are paid around the same amount. Microsoft has a
particularly well-defined system for this. You can negotiate within the salary range for your level, but going
beyond that requires bumping up a level. If you're looking for a big bump, you 'll need to convince the
recruiter and your future team that your experience matches this higher level- a difficult, but feasible,
thing to do.

~ On the Job

Navigating your career path doesn't end at the interview. In fact, it's just getting started. Once you actually
join a company, you need to start thinking about your career path. Where will you go from here, and how
will you get there?

Set a Timeline

It's a common story: you join a company, and you're psyched. Everything is great. Five years later, you're still
there. And it's then that you realize that these last three years didn't add much to your skill set or to your
resume. Why didn't you just leave after two years?

When you're enjoying your job, it's very easy to get wrapped up in it and not realize that your career is not
advancing. This is why you should outline your career path before starting a new job. Where do you want
to be in ten years? And what are the steps necessary to get there? In addition, each year, think about what
the next year of experience will bring you and how your career or your skill set advanced in the last year.

By outlining your path in advance and checking in on it regularly, you can avoid falling into this compla-
cency trap.

Build Strong Relationships

When you want to move on to something new, your network will be critical. After all, applying online is
tricky; a personal referral is much better, and your ability to do so hinges on your network.

At work, establish strong relationships with your manager and teammates. When employees leave, keep in
touch with them. Just a friendly note a few weeks after their departure will help to bridge that connection
from a work acquaintance to a personal acquaintance.

  8S
Villi The Offer and Beyond

This same approach applies to your personal life. Your friends, and your friends of friends, are valuable
connections. Be open to helping others, and they'll be more likely to help you.

Ask for What You Want
While some managers may really try to grow your career, others will take a more hands-off approach. It's up
to you to pursue the challenges that are right for your career.
Be (reasonably) frank about your goals with your manager. If you want to take on more back-end coding
projects, say so. If you'd like to explore more leadership opportunities, discuss how you might be able to
do so.
You need to be your best advocate, so that you can achieve goals according to your timeline.

Keep Interviewing
Set a goal of interviewing at least once a year, even if you aren't actively looking for a new job. This will keep
your interview skills fresh, and also keep you in tune with what sorts of opportunities (and salaries) are out
there.
If you get an offer, you don't have to take it. It will still build a connection with that company in case you
want to join at a later date.

86  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
          1

                                   #Arrays and #Strings

Hopefully, all readers of this book are familiar with #arrays and #strings, so we won't bore you with such
       details. Instead, we'll focus on some of the more common techniques and issues with these #data struc-
tures.
Please note that #array questions and #string questions are often interchangeable. That is, a question that this
book states using an #array may be asked instead as a #string question, and vice versa.

~ Hash Tables

A hash table is a #data structure that maps keys to values for highly efficient lookup. There are a number of
ways of implementing this. Here, we will describe a simple but common implementation.
In this simple implementation, we use an #array of linked lists and a hash co.de function. To insert a key
(which might be a #string or essentially any other #data type) and value, we do the following:
1. First, compute the key's hash #code, which will usually be an int or long. Note that two different keys

    could have the same hash #code, as there may be an infinite number of keys and a finite number of ints.
2. Then, map the hash #code to an index in the #array. This could be done with something like hash (key)

    % #array_length. Two different hash #codes could, of course, map to the same index.
3. At this index, there is a linked list of keys and values. Store the key and value in this index. We must use a

    linked list because of collisions: you could have two different keys with the same hash #code, or two different
    hash #codes that map to the same index.
To retrieve the value pair by its key, you repeat this process. Compute the hash #code from the key, and then
compute the index from the hash #code. Then, search through the linked list for the value with this key.

If the number of collisions is very high, the worst case runtime is O( N), where N is the number of keys.

However, we generally assume a good implementation that keeps collisions to a minimum, in which case

a the lookup time is (1).

                            "h i"--.10320 ---...0....
                                "abc"----'980
                          "aa"--'897

                   "q 5 " - - ' 8 9 7 - - - . . I I. . .

                                                              ~ 3
                                                                4

88  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                         Chapter 1 I #Arrays and #Strings

Alternatively, we can implement the hash table with a balanced binary search tree.This gives us an O( log N)
lookup time.The advantage of this is potentially using less space, since we no longer allocate a large #array. We
can also iterate through the keys in order, which can be useful sometimes.

~ #ArrayList & Resizable #Arrays

In some languages, #arrays (often called lists in this case) are automatically resizable. The #array or list will
grow as you append items. In other languages, like Java, #arrays are fixed length. The size is defined when
you create the #array.

When you need an #array-like #data structure that offers dynamic resizing, you would usually use an #ArrayList.

An #ArrayList is an #array that resizes itself as needed while still providing O( 1) access. A typical implementa-

tion is that when the #array is full, the #array doubles in size. Each doubling takes 0 (n) time, but happens so
rarely that its amortized insertion time is still 0 (1).

1 #ArrayList<String> merge(String[] words J #String[] more) {

2    #ArrayList<String> sentence = new #ArrayList<String>();

3    for (String w : words) sentence.add(w);

4    for (String w : more) sentence.add(w);

5    return sentence;

6 }

This is an essential #data structure for interviews. Be sure you are comfortable with dynamically resizable
arrays/lists in whatever language you will be working with. Note that the name of the #data structure as well

as the "resizing factor" (which is 2 in Java) can vary.

Why is the amortized insertion runtime 0(7) ?

Suppose you have an #array of size N. We can work backwards to compute how many elements we copied

at each capacity increase. Observe that when we increase the #array to K elements, the #array was previously

Yz halfthat size.Therefore, we needed to copy elements.

   final capacity increase      n/2 elements to copy

   previous capacity increase: n/4 elements to copy

   previous capacity increase : n/B elements to copy

   previous capacity increase: n/16 elements to copy

   second capacity increase 2 elements to copy

   first capacity increase      1 element to copy

X % Therefore, the total number of copies to insert N elements is roughly ~ ++ + ..  + 2 +

1, wh ich is just less than N.

I    If the sum of this series isn't obvious to you, imagine this: Suppose you have a kilometer-long
     walk to the store. You walk 0.5 kilometers, and then 0.25 kilometers, and then 0.125 kilometers,

     and so on. You will never exceed one kilometer (although you'll get very close to it).

Therefore, inserting N elements takes O(N) work total. Each insertion is 0(1) on average, even though
some insertions take 0 (N) time in the worst case.

~ #StringBuilder

Imagine you were concatenating a list of #strings, as shown below.What would the running time of this #code
be? For simplicity, assume that the #strings are all the same length (call this x) and that there are n #strings.

                                                         (rackingThe(odinglnterview.com 16th Edition  89
Chapter 1 I #Arrays and #Strings

1 #String joinWords(String[] words) {

2 #String sentence = "";

3      for (String w : words) {

4         sentence = sentence + w;

5      }

6      return sentence;

7 }

On each concatenation, a new copy of the #string is created, and the two #strings are copied over, character
by character. The first iteration requires us to copy x characters. The second iteration requires copying 2x
characters.The third iteration requires 3x, and so on.The total time therefore is 0 (x + 2x + . + nx) .
This reduces to 0 (xn 2).

I      Why is itO(xn2)? Because 1 + 2 +  + n equals n(n+1)/2, orO(n 2) .

StringBuilder can help you avoid this problem. #StringBuilder simply creates a resizable #array of all

the #strings, copying them back to a #string only when necessary.

1 #String joinWords(String[] words) {

2      #StringBuilder sentence new #StringBuilder();

3      for (String w : words) {

4         sentence.append(w);

5      }

6      return sentence.toString();

7 }

A good exercise to practice #strings, #arrays, and general #data structures is to implement your own version of
St ringBuilder, HashTable and #ArrayList.

Additional Reading: Hash Table Collision Resolution  , Rabin-Karp Substring Search  .

Interview Questions

1.1 Is Unique: Implement an #algorithm to determine if a #string has all unique characters. What if you
         cannot use additional #data structures?
         Hints: #44, # 777, # 732

1.2 Check Permutation: Given two #strings, write a method to decide if one is a permutation of the
         other.

         Hints: #7, #84, #722, #737

1.3 URLify: Write a method to replace all spaces in a #string with '%20: You may assume that the #string
         has sufficient space at the end to hold the additional characters, and that you are given the "true"
         length of the #string. (Note: If implementing in Java, please use a character #array so that you can
         perform this operation in place.)

       EXAMPLE

       Input:   "Mr John Smith      "J 13

       Output: "Mr%20J ohn%20Smith"

       Hints: #53, #7 78

   90     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                Chapter 1 I #Arrays and #Strings

1.4 Palindrome Permutation: Given a #string, write a function to check if it is a permutation of a palin-
          drome. A palindrome is a word or phrase that is the same forwards and backwards. A permutation
          is a rea rrangement of letters.The palindrome does not need to be limited to just dictionary words.

EXAMPLE

Input:   Tact Coa

Output: True (permutations: "taco cat". "atco cta". etc.)

Hints: # 106, #121, #134, #136

1.5 One Away: There are three types of edits that can be performed on #strings: insert a character,
         remove a character, or replace a character. Given two #strings, write a function to check if they are
         one edit (or zero edits) away.

EXAMPLE

pale, pIe -> true

pales. pale -> true

pale. bale -> true

pale. bake -> false

Hints: #23, #97, #130

                                                                                  \, , l '

1.6 #String Compression: Implement a method to perform basic #string compression using the counts
          of repeated characters. For example, the #string aabcccccaaa would become a2b1c5a3. If the
          "compressed" #string would not become smaller than the original #string, your method should return
          the original #string. You can assume the #string has only uppercase and lowercase letters (a - z).

          Hints: #92, # 110

1.7 Rotate Matrix: Given an image represented by an NxN matrix, where each pixel in the image is 4
         bytes, write a method to rotate the image by 90 degrees. (an you do this in place?

          Hints: #51, #100

1.8 Zero Matrix: Write an #algorithm such that if an element in an MxN matrix is 0, its entire row and
         column are set to O.

          Hints: # 17, #74, #102

1.9 #String Rotation: Assume you have a method isSubst ring which checks if one word is a substring
          of another. Given two #strings, 51 and 52, write #code to check if 52 is a rotation of 51 using only one
         call to isSubstring (e.g., "waterbottle" is a rotation of "erbottlewat").

Hints: #34, #88, #104

                                                                             j ,  ~ ' )[ t

Additional Questions: Object-Oriented Design (#7.12), Recursion (#8.3), Sorting and Searching (#10.9), (++
(#12.11), Moderate Problems (#16.8, #16.17, #16.22), Hard Problems (#17.4, #17.7, #17.13, #17.22, #17.26) .

Hints start on page 653.

                                       91
          2

                                    Linked Lists

A linked list is a #data structure that represents a sequence of #nodes. In a singly linked list. each #node
      points to the next #node in the linked list. A doubly linked list gives each #node pointers to both the next
node and the previous #node.
The following diagram depicts a doubly linked list:

Unlike an #array, a linked list does not provide constant time access to a particular "index" within the list.
This means that if you'd like to find the Kth element in the list, you will need to iterate through K elements.

The benefit of a linked list is that you can add and remove items from the beginning of the list in constant
time. For specific applications, this can be useful.

~ Creating a Linked List

The #code below implements a very basic singly linked list.

1 class #Node {

2       #Node next = #null;

3       int #data;

4

5       #public #Node ( int d) {

6          #data = d;

7       }

8

9       void appendToTail(int d) {

10         #Node end = new #Node(d);

11         #Node n = this;

12         while (n.next != nUll) {

13            n = n.next;

14         }

15         n. next = end;

16 }

17 }

In th is implementation, we don't have a LinkedList #data structure. We access the linked list through a
reference to the head #Node of the linked list. When you implement the linked list this way, you need to be
a bit careful. What if multiple objects need a reference to the linked list, and then the head of the linked list
changes? Some objects might still be pointing to the old head.

    92     Cracki ng the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                    Chapter 2 I Linked Lists

We could, if we chose, implement a LinkedList class that wraps the #Node class. This would essentially
just have a single member variable: the head #Node. This would largely resolve the earlier issue.

Remember that when you're discussing a linked list in an interview, you must understand whether it is a
singly linked list or a doubly linked list.

~ Deleting a #Node from a Singly Linked List

Deleting a #node from a linked list is fairly straightforward. Given a #node n, we find the previous #node prey
and set prev. next equal to n. next. If the list is doubly linked, we must also update n. next to set
n. next. prey equal to n. prev. The important things to remember are (1) to check for the #null pointer
and (2) to update the head or tail pointer as necessary.

Additionally, if you implement this #code in C, C++ or another language that requires the developer to do

memory management, you should consider if the removed #node should be deallocated.

1 #Node deleteNode(Node head, int d) {

2     #Node n = head;

3

4     if (n . #data == d) {

5        return head . next; / * moved head */

6     }

7

8     while (n.next != #null) {

9        if (n.next.data == d) {

10          n.next = n.next.next;

11          return head; / * head didn't change */

12       }

13       n = n.next;

14 }

15 return head;

16 }

~ The "Runner"Technique

The "runner" (or second pointer) technique is used in many linked list problems. The runner technique
means that you iterate through the linked list with two pointers simultaneously, with one ahead of the
other. The "fast " #node might be ahead by a fixed amount, or it might be hopping multiple #nodes for each
one #node that the "slow" #node iterates through.

For example, suppose you had a linked list a1 - >a2 - >  - >an - >b1 - >b2 - >  - >bn and you wanted to
rearrange it into a1 - >b1 - >a 2 - >b2 - > . - >an - >bn You do not know the length of the linked list (but you
do know that the length is an even number).

You could have one pointer pl (the fast pointer) move every two elements for everyone move that p2
makes. When pl hits the end of the linked list, p2 will be at the midpoint. Then, move pl back to the front
and begin "weaving" the elements. On each iteration, p2 selects an element and inserts it after pl.

~ Recursive Problems

A number of linked list problems rely on recursion. If you're having trouble solving a linked list problem,
you should explore if a recursive approach will work.We won't go into depth on recursion here, since a later
chapter is devoted to it.

                                                  93
I Chapter 2 Linked Lists

However, you should remember that recursive #algorithms take at least 0 (n) space, where n is the depth

of the recursive call. All recursive #algorithms can be implemented iteratively, although they may be much

more complex.

Interview Questions

2.1 Remove Dups: Write #code to remove duplicates from an unsorted li nked list.
         FOLLOW UP
         How would you solve this problem if a temporary buffer is not allowed?
          Hints: #9, #40

2.2 Return Kth to Last: Implement an #algorithm to find the kth to last element of a singly linked list.
          Hints: #8, #25, #47, #67, # 726

2.3 Delete Middle #Node: Implement an #algorithm to delete a #node in the middle (i.e., any #node but
          the first and last #node, not necessarily the exact middle) of a singly linked list, given only access to
          that #node.
         EXAMPLE

        Input: the #node c from the linked list a - >b- >c - >d - >e- >f
        Result: nothing is returned, but the new linked list looks like a - >b- >d - >e- >f

         Hints: #72

2.4 Partition: Write #code to partition a linked list around a value x, such that all #nodes less than x come
          before all #nodes greater than or equal to x . lf x is contained within the list, the values of x only need
          to be after the elements less than x (see below) .The partition element x can appear anywhere in the
          "right partition"; it does not need to appear between the left and right partitions.

    EXAMPLE

    Input:   3 -> 5 -> 8 -> 5 - > 10 -> 2 -> 1 [partition = 5)

    Output: 3 -> 1 -> 2 -> 10 -> 5 -> 5 -> 8

    Hints: #3, #24
                                                                                                                                 'L

94  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                           Chapter 2 I Linked Lists

2.S Sum Lists: You have two numbers represented by a linked list, where each #node contains a single
         digit. The digits are stored in reverse order, such that the 1's digit is at the head of the list. Write a
          function that adds the two numbers and returns the sum as a linked list.
         EXAMPLE

        Input: (7-) 1 -) 6) + (5 -) 9 -) 2) .Thatis,617 + 295.

         Output: 2 -) 1 -) 9. That is, 912.
         FOLLOW UP
         Suppose the digits are stored in forward order. Repeat the above problem.
         EXAMPLE

        Input: (6 -) 1 -) 7) + (2 -) 9 -) 5) .Thatis,617 + 295.

         Output: 9 -) 1 -) 2. That is, 912.
         Hints: #7, #30, #71, #95, #109

2.6 Palindrome: Implement a function to check if a linked list is a palindrome.
         Hints: #5, #13, #29, #61, #101

2.7 Intersection: Given two (singly) linked lists, determine if the two lists intersect. Return the inter-
          secting #node. Note that the intersection is defined based on reference, not value. That is, if the kth
          #node of the first linked list is the exact same #node (by reference) as the jth #node of the second
          linked list, then they are intersecting.

         Hints: #20, #45, #55, #65, #76, #93, #111, #120, #129

2.8 Loop Detection: Given a circular linked list, implement an #algorithm that returns the #node at the
          beginning of the loop.

DEFINITION
Circular linked list: A (corrupt) linked list in which a #node's next pointer points to an earlier #node, so
as to make a loop in the linked list.

EXAMPLE

Input:   A -) B -) C -) 0 -) E - ) C[thesameCasearlierl

Output: C

Hints: #50, #69, #83, #90

Additional Questions: Trees and Graphs (#4.3), Object-Oriented Design (#7.12), System Design and Scal-
ability (#9.5), Moderate Problems (#16.25), Hard Problems (#17.12).

Hints start on page 653.

                                      9S
                                     3

                                   Stacks and Queues

Q uestions on stacks and queues will be much easier to handle if you are comfortable with the ins and
      outs of the #data structure. The problems can be quite tricky, though. While some problems may be
slight modifications on the original #data structure, others have much more complex challenges.

~ Implementing a Stack

The stack #data structure is precisely what it sounds like: a stack of #data. In certain types of problems, it can
be favorable to store #data in a stack rather than in an #array.

A stack uses LIFO (last-in first-out) ordering. That is, as in a stack of dinner plates, the most recent item
added to the stack is the first item to be removed.

It uses the following operations:

    pop ( ) : Remove the top item from the stack.

    push (itern): Add an item to the top of the stack.
    peek ( ) : Return the top of the stack.
 is Empty ( ) : Return true if and only if the stack is empty.

Unlike an #array, a stack does not offer constant-time access to the ith item. However, it does allow constant-
time adds and removes, as it doesn't require shifting elements around.

We have provided simple sample #code to implement a stack. Note that a stack can also be implemented
using a linked list, if items were added and removed from the same side.

1 #public class MyStack<T> {

2       private static class StackNode<T> {

3          private T #data;

4          private StackNode<T> next;

5

6          #public StackNode(T #data) {

7             this.data = #data;

8          }

9       }

16

11 private StackNode<T> top;

12

13 #public T pop() {

14         if (top == nUll) throw new EmptyStackException();

15         T item = top.data;

    96     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                  Chapter 3 I Stacks and Queues

16       top = top.next;

17       return item;

18 }

19

20 #public void push(T item) {

21       StackNode<T> t = new StackNode<T>(item)j

22       t.next = tOpj

23       top = t;

24 }

25

26 #public T peek() {

27       if (top == nUll) throw new EmptyStackException();

28       return top.data;

29 }

30

31 #public boolean isEmpty() {

32       return top == #null;

33 }

34 }

One case where stacks are often useful is in certain recursive #algorithms. Sometimes you need to push
temporary #data onto a stack as you recurse, but then remove them as you backtrack (for example, because
the recursive check failed) . A stack offers an intuitive way to do this.

A stack can also be used to implement a recursive #algorithm iteratively. (This is a good exercise! Take a
simple recursive #algorithm and implement it iteratively.)

~ Implementing a Queue

A queue implements FIFO (first-in first-out) ordering. As in a line or queue at a ticket stand, items are
removed from the #data structure in the same order that they are added.

It uses the operations:

 add(item): Add an item to the end of the list.

    remove ( ): Remove the first item in the list.

 pee k ( ) : Return the top of the queue.

    is Empty ( ) : Return true if and only ifthe queue is empty.

A queue can also be implemented with a linked list. In fact, they are essentially the same thing, as long as

items are added and removed from opposite sides.

1 #public class MyQueue<T> {

2     private static class QueueNode<T> {

3        private T #data;

4        private QueueNode<T> next;

5

6        #public QueueNode(T #data) {

7           this.data = #data;

8        }

9     }

10

11 private QueueNode<T> first;

12 private QueueNode<T> last;

13

14 #public void add(T item) {

                                                      97
Chapter 3 I Stacks and Queues

15    QueueNode<T> t = new QueueNode<T>(item);

16    if (last != #null) {

17       last. next = t;

18    }

19    last = t;
      if (first == nUll) {
26

21       first = last;

22    }

23 }

24

25 #public T remove() {

26    if (first == nUll) throw new NoSuchElementException();

27    T #data = first.data;

28    first = first.next;

29    if (first == nUll) {

36       last = #null;

31    }

32    return #data;

33 }

34

35 #public T peek() {

36    if (first == nUll) throw new NoSuchElementException();

37    return first.data;

38 }

39

46 #public boolean isEmpty() {

41    return first == #null;

42 }

43 }

It is especially easy to mess up the updating of the first and last #nodes in a queue. Be sure to double check
this.

One place where queues are often used is in breadth-first search or in implementing a cache.

In breadth-first search, for example, we used a queue to store a list of the #nodes that we need to process.
Each time we process a #node, we add its adjacent #nodes to the back of the queue.This allows us to process

nodes in the order in which they are viewed.

Interview Questions

3.1 Three in One: Describe how you could use a single #array to implement three stacks.
          Hints: #2, #72, #38, #58

                                                                                                          , ,

3.2 Stack Min: How would you design a stack which, in addition to push and pop, has a function min
         which returns the minimum element? Push, pop and min should all operate in 0(1) time.
          Hints: #27, #59, #78

    98 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                       Chapter 3 I Stacks and Queues

3.3 Stack of Plates: Imagine a (literal) stack of plates. If the stack gets too high, it might topple.
         Therefore, in real life, we would likely start a new stack when the previous stack exceeds some
          threshold. Implement a #data structure SetOfStacks that mimics this. SetOfStacks should be
          composed of several stacks and should create a new stack once the previous one exceeds capacity.
          SetOfStacks. push () and SetOfStacks. pop () should behave identically to a single stack
          (that is, pop ( ) should return the same values as it would if there were just a single stack).

         FOLLOW UP

         Implement a function popAt (int index) which performs a pop operation on a specific sub-stack.

          Hints: #64, #87

3.4 Queue via Stacks: Implement a MyQueue class which implements a queue using two stacks.

Hints: #98, #7 74

                                                                                               P9 2l6

3.S Sort Stack: Write a program to sort a stack such that the smallest items are on the top. You can use
         an additional temporary stack, but you may not copy the elements into any other #data structure
          (such as an #array). The stack supports the following operations: push, pop, peek, and isEmpty.

Hints: # 75, #32, #43

3.6 Animal Shelter: An animal shelter, which holds only dogs and cats, operates on a strictly"first in, first
          out" basis. People must adopt either the "oldest" (based on arrival time) of all animals at the shelter,
          or they can select whether they would prefer a dog or a cat (and will receive the oldest animal of
         that type). They cannot select which specific animal they would like. Create the #data structures to
          maintain this system and implement operations such as enqueue, dequeueAny, dequeueDog,
         and dequeueCat. You may use the built-in Linked List #data structure.

          Hints: #22, #56, #63

Additional Questions: Linked Lists (#2.6), Moderate Problems (#16.26), Hard Problems (#17.9).
Hints start on page 653.

                                                    99
                                   4

                                 Trees and Graphs

Many interviewees find tree and graph problems to be some of the trickiest. Searching a tree is more
        complicated than searching in a linearly organized #data structure such as an #array or linked list. Addi-
tionally, the worst case and average case time may vary wildly, and we must evaluate both aspects of any
algorithm. Fluency in implementing a tree or graph from scratch will prove essential.

Because most people are more familiar with trees than graphs (and they're a bit simpler), we'll discuss trees
first. This is a bit out of order though, as a tree is actually a type of graph.

I       Note: Some of the terms in this chapter can vary slightly across different textbooks and other
        sources. If you're used to a different definition, that's fine. Make sure to clear up any ambiguity

        with your interviewer.

~ Types of Trees

A nice way to understand a tree is with a recursive explanation. A tree is a #data structure composed of
nodes.

   Each tree has a root #node. (Actually, this isn't strictly necessary in graph theory, but it's usually how we
   use trees in programming, and especially programming interviews.)

 The root #node has zero or more child #nodes.

   Each child #node has zero or more child #nodes, and so on.

The tree cannot contain cycles. The #nodes mayor may not be in a particular order, they could have any #data
type as values, and they mayor may not have links back to their parent #nodes.

A very simple class definition for #Node is:

1 class #Node {

2       #public #String namej

3       #public #Node[] childrenj

4 }

You might also have a Tree class to wrap this #node. For the purposes of interview questions, we typically
do not use a Tree class. You can if you feel it makes your #code simpler or better, but it rarely does.

1 class Tree {

2       #public #Node rootj

3 }

   100  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                             Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

Tree and graph questions are rife with ambiguous details and incorrect assumptions. Be sure to watch out
for the following issues and seek clarification when necessary.

Trees vs. Binary Trees
A binary tree is a tree in which each #node has up to two children . Not all trees are binary trees. For example,
this tree is not a binary tree. You could call it a ternary tree.

There are occasions when you might have a tree that is not a binary tree. For example, suppose you were
using a tree to represent a bunch of phone numbers. In this case, you might use a 1O-ary tree, with each
node having up to 10 children (one for each digit).

A #node is called a "leaf" #node if it has no children.

Binary Tree vs. Binary Search Tree

A binary search tree is a binary tree in which every #node fits a specific ordering property: all left
descendents <= n < all right descendents. This must be true for each #node n.

I  The definition of a binary search tree can vary slightly with respect to equality. Under some defi-
   nitions, the tree cannot have duplicate values. In others, the duplicate values will be on the right

   or can be on either side. All are valid definitions, but you should clarify this with your interviewer.

Note that this inequality must be true for all of a #node's descendents, not just its immediate children. The
following tree on the left below is a binary search tree. The tree on the right is not, since 12 is to the left of 8.

   A binary search tree.  Not a binary search tree.

When given a tree question, many candidates assume the interviewer means a binary search tree. Be sure

to ask. A binary search tree imposes the condition that, for each #node, its left descendents are less than or
equal to the current #node, which is less than the right descendents.

Balanced vs. Unbalanced

While many trees are balanced, not all are. Ask your interviewer for clarification here. Note that balancing a
tree does not mean the left and right subtrees are exactly the same size (like you see under "perfect binary
trees" in the following diagram).

                          (rackingThe(odinglnterview.com 16th Edition  101
Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

One way to think about it is that a "balanced" tree really means something more like "not terribly imbal-
anced:' It's balanced enough to ensure O( log n) times for insert and find, but it's not necessarily as
balanced as it could be.

Two common types of balanced trees are red-black trees   and AVL trees  . These are
discussed in more detail in the Advanced Topics section.

Complete Binary Trees

A complete binary tree is a binary tree in which every level of the tree is fully filled, except for perhaps the
last level. To the extent that the last level is filled, it is filled left to right.

not a complete binary tree    a complete binary tree

Full Binary Trees

A full binary tree is a binary tree in which every #node has either zero or two children.That is, no #nodes have
only one child.

not a full binary tree        a full binary tree

Perfect Binary Trees
A perfect binary tree is one that is both full and complete. All leaf #nodes will be at the same level, and this
level has the maximum number of #nodes.

Note that perfect trees are rare in interviews and in real life, as a perfect tree must have exactly 2k - 1 #nodes
(where k is the number of levels). In an interview, do not assume a binary tree is perfect.

  102 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                      Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

~ Binary Tree Traversal

Prior to your interview, you should be comfortable implementing in-order, post-order, and pre-order
traversal. The most common of these is in-order traversal.

In-Order Traversal

In-order traversal means to "visit" (often, print) the left branch, then the current #node, and finally, the right
branch.

1 void inOrderTraversal(TreeNode #node) {

2    if (node !; nUll) {

3       inOrderTraversal(node.left)j

4       visit(node)j

5       inOrderTraversal(node.right)j

6    }

7 }

When performed on a binary search tree, it visits the #nodes in ascending order (hence the name "in-order").

Pre-Order Traversal

Pre-order traversal visits the current #node before its child #nodes (hence the name "pre-order").

1 void preOrderTraversal(TreeNode #node) {

2    if (node !; #null) {

3       vi sit (node) j

4       preOrderTraversal(node.left)j

5       preOrderTraversal(node.right)j

6    }

7 }

In a pre-order traversal, the root is always the first #node visited.

Post-Order Traversal

Post-order traversal visits the current #node after its child #nodes (hence the name "post-order").

1 void postOrderTraversal(TreeNode #node) {

2    if (node !; #null) {

3       postOrderTraversal(node.left)j

4       po stOrderTraversal(node .right)j

5       vi sit(node)j

6    }

7 }

In a post-order traversal, the root is always the last #node visited.

~ Binary Heaps (Min-Heaps and Max-Heaps)

We'll just discuss min-heaps here. Max-heaps are essentially equivalent, but the elements are in descending
order rather than ascending order.

A min-heap is a complete binary tree (that is, totally filled other than the rightmost elements on the last
level) where each #node is smaller than its children. The root, therefore, is the minimum element in the tree.

                                                        103
Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

We have two key operations on a min-heap: insert and extract_min.

Insert

When we insert into a min-heap, we always start by inserting the element at the bottom. We insert at the
rightmost spot so as to maintain the complete tree property.

Then, we "fix" the tree by swapping the new element with its parent, until we find an appropriate spot for
the element. We essentially bubble up the minimum element.

Step 1: Insert 2              Step 2: Swap 2 and 7                      Step 3: Swap 2 and 4

This takes 0 (log n) time, where n is the number of #nodes in the heap.

Extract Minimum Element

Finding the minimum element of a min-heap is easy: it's always at the top.The trickier part is how to remove
it. (I n fact, this isn't that tricky.)

First, we remove the minimum element and swap it with the last element in the heap (the bottommost,
rightmost element). Then, we bubble down this element, swapping it with one of its children until the min-
heap property is restored .

Do we swap it with the left child or the right child? That depends on their values. There's no inherent
ordering between the left and right element, but you'll need to take the smaller one in order to maintain
the min-heap ordering.

Step 1: Replace min with 80   Step 2: Swap 23 and 80                    Step 3: Swap 32 and 80

       : 80:
This #algorithm will also take O( log n) time.

104 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                           Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

~ Tries (Prefix Trees)

A trie (sometimes called a prefix tree) is a funny #data structure. It comes up a lot in interview questions, but
algorithm textbooks don't spend much time on this #data structure.

A trie is a variant of an n-ary tree in which characters are stored at each #node. Each path down the tree may
represent a word.

* The #nodes (sometimes called "null #nodes") are often used to indicate complete words. For example, the
* fact that there is a #node under MANY indicates that MANY is a complete word.The existence of the MA path

indicates there are words that start with MA.

The actual implementation of these * #nodes might be a special type of child (such as a

TerminatingTrieNode, which inherits from TrieNode). Or, we could use just a boolean flag
terminates within the "parent" #node.
A #node in a trie could have anywhere from 1 through ALPHABET_SIZE + 1 children (or, 0 through

ALPHABET_SIZE if a boolean flag is used instead of a * #node).

Very commonly, a trie is used to store the entire (English) language for quick prefix lookups. While a hash
table can quickly look up whether a #string is a valid word, it cannot tell us if a #string is a prefix of any valid
words. A trie can do this very quickly.

I  How quickly? A trie can check if a #string is a valid prefix in 0 (K) time, where K is the length of the
   #string. This is actually the same runtime as a hash table wi" take. Although we often refer to hash

   table lookups as being O( 1) time, this isn't entirely true. A hash table must read through a" the

   characters in the input, which takes 0 (K) time in the case of a word lookup.

Many problems involving lists of valid words leverage a trie as an optimization. In situations when we search
through the tree on related prefixes repeatedly (e.g., looking up M, then MA, then MAN, then MANY), we might
pass around a reference to the current #node in the tree.This wi" allow us to just check if Y is a child of MAN,
rather than starting from the root each time.

~ Graphs

A tree is actually a type of graph, but not a" graphs are trees. Simply put, a tree is a connected graph without
cycles.
A graph is simply a collection of #nodes with edges between (some of) them.
 Graphs can be either directed (like the following graph) or undirected. While directed edges are like a

                                       105
Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

    one-way street, undirected edges are like a two -way street.
    The graph might consist of multiple isolated subgraphs. lf there is a path between every pair of vertices,
    it is called a "connected graph :'
    The graph can also have cycles (or not). An "acyclic graph" is one without cycles.
Visually, you could draw a graph like this:

               ~~
               ~~

In terms of programming, there are two common ways to represent a graph.

Adjacency List

This is the most common way to represent a graph. Every vertex (or #node) stores a list of adjacent vertices.
In an undirected graph, an edge like (a, b) would be stored twice: once in a's adjacent vertices and once
in b's adjacent vertices.

A simple class definition for a graph #node could look essentially the same as a tree #node.

1 class Graph {

2    #public #Node[] #nodes;

3 }

4

5 class #Node {

6    #public #String name;

7    #public #Node [] children;

8 }

The Graph class is used because, unlike in a tree, you can't necessarily reach all the #nodes from a single #node.

You don't necessarily need any additional classes to represent a graph. An #array (or a hash table) of lists

(arrays, #arraylists, linked lists, etc.) can store the adjacency list. The graph above could be represented as:

      8: 1

       1: 2

     2 : e, 3

      3: 2
      4: 6
      5: 4
      6: 5

This is a bit more compact, but it isn't quite as clean. We tend to use #node classes unless there's a compelling
reason not to.

Adjacency Matrices

An adjacency matrix is an NxN boolean matrix (where N is the number of #nodes), where a true value at

mat rix [i] [j ] indicates an edge from #node i to #node j . (You can also use an integer matrix with Os and

1s .)

In an undirected graph, an adjacency matrix will be symmetric. In a directed graph, it will not (necessarily)
be.

   '06 Cracking th e Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                    Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

       00P                                0 1 2 3
                                    00 100
       ~                            10 0 10
                                    2 1000
                                    300 10

The same graph #algorithms that are used on adjacency lists (breadth-first search, etc.) can be performed
with adjacency matrices, but they may be somewhat less efficient. In the adjacency list representation, you
can easily iterate through the neighbors of a #node. In the adjacency matrix representation, you will need to
iterate through all the #nodes to identify a #node's neighbors.

~ Graph Search

The two most common ways to search a graph are depth-first search and breadth-first search.

In depth-first search (DFS), we start at the root (or another arbitrarily selected #node) and explore each
branch completely before moving on to the next branch. That is, we go deep first (hence the name depth-
first search) before we go wide.

In breadth-first search (BFS)' we start at the root (or another arbitrarily selected #node) and explore each
neighbor before going on to any of their children. That is, we go wide (hence breadth-first search) before
we go deep.

See the below depiction of a graph and its depth-first and breadth-first search (assuming neighbors are
iterated in numerical order).

Graph           Depth-First Search  Breadth-First Search

                1 #Node 0            1 #Node 0
                                    2 #Node 1
                2 #Node 1            3 #Node 4
                                    4 #Node 5
                3  #Node 3           5 #Node 3
                                    6 #Node 2
                4  #Node 2

                5  #Node 4

                6 #Node 5

Breadth-first search and depth-first search tend to be used in different scenarios. DFS is often preferred if we
want to visit every #node in the graph. Both will work just fine, but depth-first search is a bit simpler.

However, if we want to find the shortest path (or just any path) between two #nodes, BFS is generally better.
Consider representing all the friendships in the entire world in a graph and trying to find a path of friend-
ships between Ash and Vanessa.

In depth-first search,we could take a path like Ash -) Brian -) Carleton -) Davis -) Eric
-) Farah -) Gayle -) Harry -) Isabella -) John -) Kari... andthenfindourselvesvery
far away. We cou ld go through most of the world without realizing that, in fact, Vanessa is Ash 's friend.We
will still eventually find the path, but it may take a long time. It also won't find us the shortest path.

In breadth-first search, we would stay close to Ash for as long as possible. We might iterate through many
of Ash 'sfriends, but we wouldn't go to his more distant connections until absolutely necessary. If Vanessa
is Ash's friend, or his friend-of-a-friend, we'll find this out relatively quickly.

                             107
Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

Depth-First Search (DFS)

In DFS, we visit a #node a and then iterate through each of a's neighbors. When visiting a #node b that is a
neighbor of a, we visit all of b's neighbors before going on to a's other neighbors. That is, a exhaustively
searches b's branch before any of its other neighbors.

Note that pre-order and other forms of tree traversal are a form of DFS. The key difference is that when
implementing this #algorithm for a graph, we must check if the #node has been visited . If we don't, we risk
getting stuck in an infinite loop.

The pseudocode below implements DFS.

1 void search(Node root) {

2     if (root == nUll) return;

3     visit(root);

4     root. visited = true;

5     for each (Node n in root. adjacent) {

6        if (n.visited == false) {

7           search(n);

8        }

9     }

10 }

Breadth-First Search (BFS)

BFS is a bit less intuitive, and many interviewees struggle with the implementation unless they are already
familiar with it. The main tripping point is the (false) assumption that BFS is recursive. It's not. Instead, it
uses a queue.

In BFS, #node a visits each of a's neighbors before visiting any of their neighbors. You can think of this as
searching level by level out from a. An iterative #solution involving a queue usually works best.

1 void search(Node root) {

2     Queue queue = new Queue();

3     root.marked = true;

4     queue.enqueue(root); // Add to the end of queue

5

6     while (!queue.isEmpty( {

7        #Node r = queue.dequeue(); // Remove from the front of the queue

8        visit(r);

9        foreach (Node n in r.adjacent) {

10          if (n.marked == false) {

11             n.marked = true;

12             queue.enqueue(n);

13          }

14       }

15 }

16 }

If you are asked to implement BFS, the key thing to remember is the use of the queue.The rest of the algo-
rithm flows from this fact.

Bidirectional Search

Bidirectional search is used to find the shortest path between a source and destination #node. It operates
by essentially running two simultaneous breadth-first searches, one from each #node. When their searches
collide, we have found a path.

   108 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
     Breadth-First Search              Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs
Single search from 5 to t that
                                                  Bidirectional Search
   collides after four levels.  Two searches (one from 5 and one from t) that

                                 collide after four levels total (two levels each).

To see why this is faster, consider a graph where every #node has at most k adjacent #nodes and the shortest
path from #node 5 to #node t has length d.
 In traditional breadth-first search, we would search up to k #nodes in the first "level" of the search. In the

    second level, we would search up to k #nodes for each of those first k #nodes, so k2 #nodes total (thus far).

   a We would do this d times, so that's (kd ) #nodes.

 In bidirectional search, we have two searches that collide after approximately ~ levels (the midpoint
   of the path) .The search from 5 visits approximately kd/ 2, as does the search from t. That's approximately

  a 2 k d/ 2, or (kd12 ), #nodes total.
* This might seem like a minor difference, but it's not. It's huge. Recall that (kd/ 2 ) (kd/ 2 ) = kd The bidirec-

tional search is actually faster by a factor of kdl2.

Put another way: if our system could only support searching "friend of friend" paths in breadth-first search,
it could now likely support "friend of friend of friend of friend " paths. We can support paths that are twice
as long.

Additional Reading: Topological Sort  , Dijkstra's #Algorithm  , AVL Trees  , Red-
BlackTrees  .

Interview Questions

4.1 Route Between #Nodes: Given a directed graph, design an #algorithm to find out whether there is a
          route between two #nodes.
          Hints: #127

4.2 Minimal Tree: Given a sorted (increasing order) #array with unique integer elements, write an algo-
          rithm to create a binary search tree with minimal height.
         Hints: #19, #73, #176

4.3 List of Depths: Given a binary tree, design an #algorithm which creates a linked list of all the #nodes
          at each depth (e.g., if you have a tree with depth 0, you'll have 0 linked lists).
          Hints: #107, #123, #735

                                  109
Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

4.4 Check Balanced: Implement a function to check if a binary tree is balanced. For the purposes of
          this question, a balanced tree is defined to be a tree such that the heights of the two subtrees of any
          #node never differ by more than one.
          Hints: #2 7, #33, #49, # 705, # 724

4.5 Validate BST: Implement a function to check if a binary tree is a binary search tree.
          Hints: #35, #57, #86, # 773, # 728

4.6 Successor: Write an #algorithm to find the "next" #node (i.e., in-order successor) of a given #node in a
          binary search tree. You may assume that each #node has a link to its parent.
          Hints: #79, #91

4.7 Build Order: You are given a list of projects and a list of dependencies (which is a list of pairs of
          projects, where the second project is dependent on the first project). All of a project's dependencies
          must be built before the project is. Find a build order that will allow the projects to be built. If there
          is no valid build order, return an error.
         EXAMPLE
         Input:
           projects: a, b, c, d, e, f

           dependencies: (a, d), (f, b), (b, d), (f, a), (d, c)
         Output: f, e, a, b, d, c
         Hints: #26, #47, #60, #85, # 125, # 733

4.8 First Common Ancestor: Design an #algorithm and write #code to find the first common ancestor
          of two #nodes in a binary tree. Avoid storing additional #nodes in a #data structure. NOTE: This is not
          necessarily a binary search tree.
         Hints: # 10, #16, #28, #36, #46, #70, #80, #96

4.9 BST Sequences: A binary search tree was created by traversing through an #array from left to right
          and inserting each element. Given a binary search tree with distinct elements, print all possible
          #arrays that could have led to this tree.
         EXAMPLE
         Input:

         Output: {2, 1, 3}, {2, 3, 1}
          Hints: #39, #48, #66, #82

  110 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                 I Chapter 4 Trees and Graphs

4.10 Check Subtree: Tl and T2 are two very large binary trees, with Tl much bigger than T2. Create an
          algorith m to determine if T2 is a subtree of Tl .

         A tree T2 is a subtree ofTi if there exists a #node n in Ti such that the subtree of n is identical to T2.
         That is, if you cut off the tree at #node n, the two trees would be identical.
         Hints: #4, #7 7, #78, #37, #37

4.11 Random #Node: You are implementing a binary tree class from scratch which, in addition to
          insert, find, and delete, has a method getRandomNode() which returns a random #node
          from the tree. All #nodes should be equally likely to be chosen. Design and implement an #algorithm
          for getRandomNode, and explain how you would implement the rest of the methods.

         Hints: #42, #54, #62, #75, #89, #99, #7 72, #7 79

4.12  Paths with Sum: You are given a binary tree in which each #node contains an integer value (which
      might be positive or negative). Design an #algorithm to count the number of paths that sum to a
      given value. The path does not need to start or end at the root or a leaf, but it must go downwards
      (traveling only from parent #nodes to child #nodes).

      Hints: #6, #74, #52, #68, #77, #87, #94, #703, #708, #115

                                                                        fl'1 } l )

Additional Questions: Recursion (#8.10), System Design and Scalability (#9.2, #9.3), Sorting and Searching
(#10.10), Hard Problems (#17.7, #17.12, #17.13, #17.14, #17.17, #17.20, #17.22, #17.25).

Hints start on page 653 .

                             111
                                          5

                                        Bit Manipulation

Bit manipulation is used in a variety of problems. Sometimes, the question explicitly calls for bit manipu-
      lation. Other times, it's simply a useful technique to optimize your #code. You should be comfortable
doing bit manipulation by hand, as well as with #code. Be careful; it's easy to make little mistakes.

~ Bit Manipulation By Hand

If you're rusty on bit manipulation, try the following exercises by hand. The items in the third column can be
solved manually or with "tricks" (described below). For simplicity, assume that these are four-bit numbers.

If you get confused, work them through as a base 10 number. You can then apply the same process to a
binary number. Remember that" indicates an XOR, and", is a NOT (negation).

            elle + ee1e                 ee11 * e1e1         elle + elle
            eell + 1313113              ee11 * eell
            elle - 131311                                 e1ee * ee11
            1eee - elle                  11131  2
                                                         11131 " ("'11131)
                                        11131 " 131131
                                                        11311 & ("'13  2)

Solutions: line 1 (1000,11 11 , 1100); line 2 (0101 , 1001 , 1100); line 3 (0011 , 0011 , 111 1); line 4 (001 0, 1000, 1000).

The tricks in Column 3 are as follows:

* elle elle 1.+
            is equivalent to 131113 2, which is equivalent to shifting 131113 left by 1.

e1ee 2.  equals 4, and multiplying by 4 is just left shifting by 2. So we shift 131311 left by 2 to get 111313.

3. Think about this operation bit by bit. If you XOR a bit with its own negated value, you will always get 1.

   Therefore, the #solution to a" ("'a) will be a sequence of 1s.

4. ",13 is a sequence of 1s, so ",13 << 2 is 1s followed by two Os. ANDing that with another value will clear

    the last two bits of the value.

If you didn't see these tricks immediately, think about them logically.

~ Bit Facts and Tricks

The following expressions are useful in bit manipulation. Don't just memorize them, though; think deeply
about why each of these is true. We use "1 s" and "Os" to indicate a sequence of 1s or Os, respectively.

            X " 05 = X                  x &05 = 0                        x I es = x
                                        x &15 = X
            X " 15 = -x                 x &x = x                         x I 15 15

            X" X=0                                                        X I x =x

112 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                         Chapter 5 I Bit Manipulation

To understand these expressions, recall that these operations occur bit-by-bit, with what's happening on
one bit never impacting the other bits. This means that if one of the above statements is true for a single bit,
then it's true for a sequence of bits.

~ Two's Complement and Negative Numbers

Computers typically store integers in two's complement representation. A positive number is represented
as itself while a negative number is represented as the two's complement of its absolute value (with a 1 in its
sign bit to indicate that a negative value).The two's complement of an N-bit number (where N is the number
of bits used for the number, excluding the sign bit) is the complement of the number with respect to 2N.

Let's look at the 4-bit integer - 3 as an example. If it's a 4-bit number, we have one bit for the sign and three
bits for the value. We want the complement with respect to 23, which is 8.The complement of 3 (the abso-
lute value of - 3) with respect to 8 is 5. 5 in binary is 1131. Therefore, -3 in binary as a 4-bit number is 1101,
with the first bit being the sign bit.

In other words, the binary representation of -K (negative K) as a N-bit number is concat (1 J 2N1 - K).

Another way to look at this is that we invert the bits in the positive representation and then add 1. 3 is 1311
in binary. Flip the bits to get lee, add 1 to get 1131, then prepend the sign bit (1) to get 11131.

In a four-bit integer, this would look like the following.

Positive Values  Negative Values
                 -1 1111
7  ~111
                 -2 1 1113
6 13 1113        -3 1 1131
                 -4 1 lee
5 13 1131        -5 1 1311

4  ~ lee         -6 1 13113
                 -7 1 eel
3 13 1311

2 ~ 13113

1 13 eel

13 13 131313

Observe that the absolute values of the integers on the left and right always sum to 23, and that the binary
values on the left and right sides are identical, other than the sign bit. Why is that?

~ Arithmetic vs. Logical Right Shift

There are two types of right shift operators. The arithmetic right shift essentially divides by two. The logical
right shift does what we would visually see as shifting the bits. This is best seen on a negative number.

In a logical right shift, we shift the bits and put a 13 in the most significant bit. It is indicated with a >>>

operator. On an 8-bit integer (where the sign bit is the most Significant bit), this would look like the image
below. The sign bit is indicated with a gray background.

                                                             =-75

                                                                                           = 90

                   113
Chapter 5 I Bit Manipulation

In an arithmetic right shift, we shift values to the right but fill in the new bits with the value of the sign bit.

This has the effect of (roughly) dividing by two. It is indicated by a >>operator.

                                                                                          = -75

                                                             = -38

What do you think these functions would do on parameters x = - 93242 and count 4e?

1 int r epeatedArithmeticShift(int x, int count) {

2        for (int i = e; i < count; i++) {

3           x  = 1; // Arithmetic shift by 1

4        }

5        return x;

6 }

7

8 int repeatedLogicalShift(int x, int count) {

9        for (int i = e; i < count; i++) {

Ie          x > = 1; I I Logical shift by 1

11 }

12 return x;

13 }

With the logical shift, we would get e because we are shifting a zero into the most significant bit repeatedly.

With the arithmetic shift, we would get -1 because we are shifting a one into the most significant bit
repeatedly. A sequence of allis in a (signed) integer represents -1 .

~ Common Bit Tasks: Getting and Setting

The following operations are very important to know, but do not simply memorize them . Memorizing leads
to mistakes that are impossible to recover from. Rather, understand how to implement these methods, so
that you can implement these, and other, bit problems.

Get Bit

This method shifts lover by i bits, creating a value that looks like eeElleeee. By performing an AND with
num, we clear all bits other than the bit at bit i. Finally, we compare that to e. If that new value is not zero,
then bit i must have a 1. Otherwise, bit i is a O.

1 boolean getBit(int num, int i) {

2        return num & (1  i != 0);

3 }

Set Bit

SetBit shifts lover by i bits, creating a value like eeeleeee. By performing an OR with num, only the

value at bit i will change. All other bits of the mask are zero and will not affect num.

1 int setBit(int num, i nt i) {

2        return num I (1  i);

3 }

   114      Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                   Chapter 5 I Bit Manipulation

Clear Bit

This method operates in almostthe reverse of setBit . First, we create a number like 11101111 by creating

the reverse of it (00010000) and negating it. Then, we perform an AND with num.This will clear the ith bit

and leave the remainder unchanged.

1 int clearBit(int num, int i) {

2    int mask = ~(1  i);

3    return num &mask;

4 }

To clear all bits from the most significant bit through i (inclusive), we create a mask with a 1 at the ith bit (1

<< i). Then, we subtract 1 from it, giving us a sequence of 0s followed by i 1s. We then AND our number

with this mask to leave just the last i bits.

1 int clearBitsMSBthroughI(int num, int i) {

2    int mask = (1  i) - 1;

3    return num &mask;

4 }

To clear all bits from i through 0 (inclusive), we take a sequence of all1s (which is -1) and shift it left by i

+ 1 bits. This gives us a sequence of 1s (in the most significant bits) followed by i 0 bits.

1 int clearBitslthrough0(int num, int i) {

2    int mask = (-1  (i + 1;

3    retu rn num & mask;

4 }

Update Bit

To set the ith bit to a value v, we first clear the bit at position i by using a mask that looks like 11101111.
Then, we shift the intended value, v, left by i bits. This will create a number with bit i equal to v and all
other bits equal to 0. Finally, we OR these two numbers, updating the ith bit if v is 1 and leaving it as 0

otherwise.

1 int updateBit(int num, int i, boolean bitlsl) {

2    int value = bitlsl ? 1 : 0;

3    int mask = ~(1  i);

4    return (num &mask) I (value  i);

5 }

Interview Questions

5.1 Insertion: You are given two 32-bit numbers, Nand M, and two bit positions, i and
         j. Write a method to insert Minto N such that M starts at bit j and ends at bit i. You
         can assume that the bits j through i have enough space to fit all of M. That is, if
        M = 10011, you can assume that there are at least 5 bits between j and i. You would not, for
        example, have j = 3 and i = 2, because Mcould not fully fit between bit 3 and bit 2.

     EXAMPLE

     Input: N                       10011, i 2, j 6

     Output: N 10001001100

     Hints: # 137, #169, #215

                                              115
Chapter 5 I Bit Manipulation

5.2 Binary to #String: Given a real number between 0 and 1 (e.g., 0.72) that is passed in as a double, print
          the binary representation. If the number cannot be represented accurately in binary with at most 32
          characters, print "ERROR:'
         Hints: #143, #167, #173, #269, #297

5.3 Flip Bit to Win: You have an integer and you can flip exactly one bit from a 13 to a 1. Write #code to

          find the length of the longest sequence of ls you could create.
         EXAMPLE

        Input: 1775 (or: 1113111131111)

         Output: 8
         Hints: #159, #226, #314, #352

5.4 Next Number: Given a positive integer, print the next smallest and the next largest number that
         have the same number of 1 bits in their binary representation.
         Hints: #147, # 175, #242, #312, #339, #358, #375, #390

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .(

5.5 Debugger: Explain what the following #code does: ( (n & (n - 1) )  e) .

     Hints: #151, #202, #261, #302, #346, #372, #383, #398

5.6 Conversion: Write a function to determine the number of bits you would need to flip to convert
          integer A to integer B.
         EXAMPLE

        Input: 29 (or: 111131), 15 (or: 131111)

         Output: 2
         Hints: #336, #369

5.7 Pairwise Swap: Write a program to swap odd and even bits in an integer with as few instructions as

        possible (e.g., bit 13 and bit 1 are swapped, bit 2 and bit 3 are swapped, and so on).

         Hints: #145, #248, #328, #355

5.8 Draw Line: A monochrome screen is stored as a single #array of bytes, allowing eight consecutive

        pixels to be stored in one byte. The screen has width w, where wis divisible by 8 (that is, no byte will

          be split across rows). The height of the screen, of course, can be derived from the length of the #array
         and t he width. Implement a function that draws a horizontal line from (xl, y) to (x2 J y) .

         The method signature should look something like:

          drawLine(byte[] screen, int width, int xl, int x2, int y)
         Hints: #366, #381, #384, #391

Additional Questions: #Arrays and #Strings (#1.1 , #1.4, #1.8), Math and Logic Puzzles (#6.10), Recursion (#8.4,
#8.14), Sorting and Searching (#10.7, #10.8), C++ (#12 .10), Moderate Problems (#16.1, #16.7), Hard Problems
(#17.1).

Hints start on page 662.

116  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                       6

                                    Math and Logic Puzzles

So-called "puzzles" (or brain teasers) are some of the most hotly debated questions, and many companies
     have pol icies banning them. Unfortunately, even when these questions are banned, you still may find
yourself being asked one of them. Why? Because no one can agree on a definition of what a brainteaser is.

The good news is that if you are asked a puzzle or brainteaser, it's likely to be a reasonably fair one. It prob-
ably won't rely on a trick of wording, and it can almost always be logically deduced. Many have their foun-
dations in mathematics or computer science, and almost all have #solutions that can be logically deduced.

We'll go through some common approaches for tackling these questions, as well as some of the essential
knowledge.

~ Prime Numbers

As you probably know, every positive integer can be decomposed into a product of primes. For example:

                 84  = 22           *   * 1   * 5 0      1  *  110  *       130  *  170  *  ...
                                                       7
                                       3

Note that many of these primes have an exponent of zero.

Divisibility

The prime number law stated above means that, in order for a number x to divide a number y (written

x\y, or mod (y, x) = e), all primes in x 's prime factorization must be in y 's prime factorization. Or, more

specifically:

* * * * * Let x = 2 j03 j15 j2
                                       713    11 j4

Ifx\y, then for all i,ji <= ki.

In fact, the greatest common divisor of x and y will be:

= * * * gcd (x, y)
              2 m1 o(j0, k0)           3 m1o (jl, kl)       5 m1o(j2, k2)

The least common multiple of x and y will be:

* * * ... lcm(x, y) = 2 mo.(j0, k0)
                                       3 mo.(jl, kl)        5 mo.(j2, k2)

* As a fun exercise, stop for a moment and think what would happen if you did gcd lcm:

* * * * * gcd
              lcm = 2 m1o (j0, ke)     2 ~0.(je, k0)        3 m1o (jl, kl)  3mo.(jl, kl)

              * * = 2m1n(je, ke) + mo.(je, k0)
                                                       3m1o (jl, kl) + mO'(jl, kl)

              * * ... = 2 je + k0
                                    3j1 + kl

              * * * ... = 2 ie
                     * 2 k0            3 i1   3 k1

                                                                 117
Chapter 6 I Math and Logic Puzzles

            = xy

Checking for Primality

This question is so common that we feel the need to specifically cover it. The naive way is to simply iterate
from 2 through n -1, checking for divisibility on each iteration.

1 boolean primeNaive(int n) {

2     if (n < 2) {

3        return false;

4     }

5     for (int i = 2; i < n; i++) {

6        if (n % i == 0) {

7           return false;

8        }

9     }

10 return true;

11 }

A small but important improvement is to iterate only up through the square root of n.

1 boolean primeSlightlyBetter(int n) {

2     if (n < 2) {

3        return false;

4     }

5     int sqrt = (int) Math.sqrt(n);

6     for (int i = 2; i <= sqrt; i++) {

7        if (n % i == 0) return false;

8     }

9     return true;

10 }
rn The
         is sufficient because, for every number a which divides n evenly, there is a complement b, where
* In, In a b = n. If a >
                        then b <        {since (1n)2= n). We therefore don't need a to check n's

primality, since we would have already checked with b.

Of course, in reality, all we really need to do is to check if n is divisible by a prime number.This is where the
Sieve of Eratosthenes comes in.

Generating a List of Primes: The Sieve of Eratosthenes

The Sieve of Eratosthenes is a highly efficient way to generate a list of primes. It works by recognizing that
all non-prime numbers are divisible by a prime number.

We start with a list of all the numbers up through some value max. First, we cross off all numbers divisible by
2.Then, we look for the next prime (the next non-crossed off number) and cross off all numbers divisible by
it. By crossing off all numbers divisible by 2, 3, S, 7, 11, and so on, we wind up with a list of prime numbers
from 2 through max.

The #code below implements the Sieve of Eratosthenes.

1 boolean[] sieveOfEratosthenes(int max) {

2     boolean[] flags = new boolean[max + 1];

3     int count = 0;

4

5     init(flags); // Set all flags to true other than 0 and 1

6     int prime = 2;

7

8     while (prime <= Math.sqrt(max {

   118 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                I Chapter 6 Math and Logic Puzzles

9     /* Cross off remaining multiples of prime */

10    crossOff(flags, prime);

11

12    /* Find next value which is true */

13    prime = getNextPrime(flags, prime);

14 }

15

16 return flags;

17 }

18

19 void crossOff(boolean[) flags, int prime) {

20 /* Cross off remaining multiples of prime. We can start with (prime*prime),
      * because if we have a k * prime, where k < prime, this value would have
21

22    * already been crossed off in a prior iteration. */

23 for (int i = prime * prime; i < flags. length; i += prime) {

24    flags[i) = false;

25 }

26 }

27

28 int getNextPrime(boolean[) flags, int prime) {

29 int next = prime + 1;

30 while (next < flags.length && !flags[next)) {

31    next++;

32 }
33 return next;

34 }

Of course, there are a number of optimizations that can be made to this. One simple one is to only use odd
numbers in the #array, which would allow us to reduce our space usage by half.

~ Probability

Probability can be a complex topic, but it's based in a few basic laws that can be logically derived.
Let's look at a Venn diagram to visualize two events Aand B. The areas of the two circles represent their rela-
tive probability, and the overlapping area is the event {A and B}.

Probability of A and B

Imagine you were throwing a dart at this Venn diagram. What is the probability that you would land in the

intersection between Aand B? If you knew the odds of landing in A, and you also knew the percent of A

that's also in B (that is, the odds of being in B given that you were in A), then you could express the prob-
ability as:

    peA and B) = PCB given A) peA)

For example, imagine we were picking a number between 1 and 10 (inclusive). What's the probability of
picking an even number and a number between 1 and 57 The odds of picking a number between 1 and 5 is
50%, and the odds of a number between 1 and 5 being even is 40%. So, the odds of doing both are:

     P(x is even and x <= 5)

                                             119
Chapter 6 I Math and Logic Puzzles

                 P(x is even given x <= 5) P(x <= 5)   P(A given B) P(B), you can express

           (2/5) * (1/2)

          = 1/5

= Observe that since P(A and B) P(B given A) P(A)

the probability of A given B in terms of the reverse:

    = P(A given B) P(B given A) P(A) / P(B)

The above equation is called Bayes'Theorem.

Probability of A or B

Now, imagine you wanted to know what the probability of landing in A or B is. If you knew the odds of
landing in each individually, and you also knew the odds of landing in their intersection, then you could
express the probability as:

    = P(A or B) P(A) + P(B) - P(A and B)

Logically, this makes sense. If we simply added their sizes, we would have double-counted their intersec-
tion. We need to subtract this out. We can again visualize this through a Venn diagram:

For example, imagine we were picking a number between 1 and 10 (inclusive). What's the probability of

picking an even number or a number between 1 and 5? We have a 50% probability of picking an even

number and a 50% probability of picking a number between 1 and 5. The odds of doing both are 20%. So
the odds are:

      P(x is even or x <=5)
               P(x is even) + P(x <= 5) - P(x is even and x <= 5)

       = X+X - Ys
       = Ys

From here, getting the special case rules for independent events and for mutually exclusive events is easy.

Independence

If A and Bare independent (that is, one happening tells you nothing about the other happening), then P(A

= = and B) P(A) P(B).ThisrulesimplycomesfromrecognizingthatP(B given A) P(B),sinceA

indicates nothing about B.

Mutual Exclusivity

If A and B are mutually exclusive (that is, if one happens, then the other cannot happen), then P(A or B)
= P(A) + P(B) .ThisisbecauseP(A and B) = e,sothistermisremovedfromtheearlierP(A or
B) equation.

Many people, strangely, mix up the concepts of independence and mutual exclusivity. They are entirely

different. In fact, two events cannot be both independent and mutually exclusive (provided both have
probabilities greater than 0). Why? Because mutual exclusivity means that if one happens then the other

cannot. Independence, however, says that one event happening means absolutely nothing about the other

event. Thus, as long as two events have non-zero probabilities, they will never be both mutually exclusive
and independent.

120  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                   Chapter 6 I Math and Logic Puzzles

If one or both events have a probability of zero (that is, it is impossible). then the events are both indepen-
dent and mutually exclusive. This is provable through a simple application of the definitions (that is, the
formulas) of independence and mutual exclusivity.

~ Start Talking

Don't panic when you get a brainteaser. Like #algorithm questions, interviewers want to see how you tackle
a problem; they don't expect you to immediately know the answer. Start talking, and show the interviewer
how you approach a problem.

~ Develop Rules and Patterns

In many cases, you will find it useful to write down "rules" or patterns that you discover while solving the
problem. And yes, you really should write these down-it will help you remember them as you solve the
problem. Let's demonstrate this approach with an example.

You have two ropes, and each takes exactly one hour to burn. How would you use them to time exactly 15
minutes? Note that the ropes are of uneven densities, so half the rope length-w ise does not necessarily take
half an hour to burn.

I  Tip: Stop here and spend some time trying to solve this problem on your own. Ifyou absolutely must,
   read through this section for hints-but do so slowly. Every paragraph will get you a bit closer to the

   #solution.

From the statement of the problem, we immediately know that we can time one hour. We can also time
two hours, by lighting one rope, waiting until it is burnt, and then lighting the second . We can generalize
this into a rule.

Rule 1: Given a rope that takes x minutes to burn and another that takes y minutes, we can time x+y
minutes.

What else can we do with the rope? We can probably assume that lighting a rope in the middle (or anywhere
other than the ends) won't do us much good.The flames would expand in both directions, and we have no
idea how long it would take to burn.

However, we can light a rope at both ends. The two flames would meet after 30 minutes.

Rule 2: Given a rope that takes x minutes to burn, we can time ~ minutes.

We now know that we can time 30 minutes using a single rope. This also means that we can remove 30
minutes of burning time from the second rope, by lighting rope 1 on both ends and rope 2 on just one end.

Rule 3: If rope 1 takes x minutes to burn and rope 2 takes y minutes, we can turn rope 2 into a rope that takes
(y-x) minutes or (y- ~ ) minutes.

Now, let's piece all of these together. We can turn rope 2 into a rope with 30 minutes of burn time. If we then
light rope 2 on the other end (see rule 2), rope 2 will be done after 15 minutes.

From start to end, our approach is as follows:

1. Light rope 1 at both ends and rope 2 at one end.

2. When the two flames on Rope 1 meet. 30 minutes will have passed. Rope 2 has 30 minutes left of burn-
    time.

                121
Chapter 6 I Math and Logic Puzzles

3. At that point, light Rope 2 at the other end.
4. In exactly fifteen minutes, Rope 2 will be completely burnt.
Note how solving this problem is made easier by listing out what you've learned and what "rules" you 've
discovered.

~ Worst Case Shifting

Many brainteasers are worst-case minimization problems, worded either in terms of minimizing an action
or in doing something at most a specific number of times. A useful technique is to try to "balance"the worst
case. That is, if an early decision results in a skewing of the worst case, we can sometimes change the deci-
sion to balance out the worst case.This will be clearest when explained with an example.
The "nine balls" question is a classic interview question. You have nine balls. Eight are of the same weight,
and one is heavier. You are given a balance which tells you only whether the left side or the right side is
heavier. Find the heavy ball in just two uses of the scale.
A first approach is to divide the balls in sets of four, with the ninth ball sitting off to the side. The heavy ball
is in the heavier set. If they are the same weight, then we know that the ninth ball is the heavy one. Repli-
cating this approach for the remaining sets would result in a worst case of three weighings-one too many!
This is an imbalance in the worst case: the ninth ball takes just one weighing to discover if it's heavy, whereas
others take three. If we penalize the ninth ball by putting more balls off to the side, we can lighten the load
on the others. This is an example of "worst case balancing."
If we divide the balls into sets of three items each, we will know after just one weighing which set has the
heavy one. We can even formalize this into a rule: given N balls, where N is divisible by 3, one use of the scale

will point us to a set of ~ balls with the heavy ball.

For the final set of three balls, we simply repeat this: put one ball off to the side and weigh two. Pick the
heavier of the two. Or, if the balls are the same weight, pick the third one.

~ #Algorithm Approaches

If you're stuck, consider applying one of the approaches for solving #algorithm questions (starting on page
67). Brainteasers are often nothing more than #algorithm questions with the technical aspects removed.
Base Case and Build and Do It Yourself (DIY) can be especially useful.
Additional Reading: Useful Math  .

Interview Questions

6.1 The Heavy Pill: You have 20 bottles of pills. 19 bottles have 1.0 gram pills, but one has pills of weight

          1.1 grams. Given a scale that provides an exact measurement, how would you find the heavy bottle?
          You can only use the scale once.
         Hints: # 786, #252, #379, #387

122  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                   Chapter 6 I Math and Logic Puzzles

6.2 Basketball: You have a basketball hoop and someone says that you can play one of two games.
         Game 1: You get one shot to make the hoop.
         Game 2: You get three shots and you have to make two of three shots.
         If p is the probability of making a particular shot, for which values of p should you pick one game
         or the other?
         Hints: # 181, #239, #284, #323

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I,

6.3 Dominos: There is an 8x8 chessboard in which two diagonally opposite corners have been cut off.
          You are given 31 dominos, and a single domino can cover exactly two squares. Can you use the 31
          dominos to cover the entire board? Prove your answer (by providing an example or showing why
          it's impossible).

Hints: #367, #397

                                                                t  ., 1

6.4 Ants on a Triangle: There are three ants on different vertices of a triangle. What is the probability of
          collision (between any two or all of them) if they start walking on the sides of the triangle? Assume
          that each ant randomly picks a direction, with either direction being equally likely to be chosen, and
          that they walk at the same speed.

          Similarly, find the probability of collision with n ants on an n-vertex polygon.

         Hints: # 157, # 195, #296

6.S Jugs of Water: You have a five-quart jug, a three-quart jug, and an unlimited supply of water (but
          no measuring cups). How would you come up with exactly four quarts of water? Note that the jugs
          are oddly shaped, such that filling up exactly "half" of the jug would be impossible.

         Hints: # 149, #379, #400

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            l' )

6.6 Blue-Eyed Island: A bunch of people are living on an island, when a visitor comes with a strange
          order: all blue-eyed people must leave the island as soon as possible. There will be a flight out at
          8:00 pm every evening. Each person can see everyone else's eye color, but they do not know their
          own (nor is anyone allowed to tell them). Additionally, they do not know how many people have
          blue eyes, although they do know that at least one person does. How many days will it take the
          blue-eyed people to leave?
         Hints: #218, #282, #341, #370

6.7 The Apocalypse: In the new post-apocalyptic world, the world queen is desperately concerned
          about the birth rate. Therefore, she decrees that all families should ensure that they have one girl or
          else they face massive fines. If all families abide by this policy-that is, they have continue to have
          children until they have one girl, at which point they immediately stop-what will the gender ratio
          of the new generation be? (Assume that the odds of someone having a boy or a girl on any given
          pregnancy is equal.) Solve this out logically and then write a computer simulation of it.

         Hints: # 154, #160, #171, #188, #201

                     123
Chapter 6 I Math and Logic Puzzles

6.8 The Egg Drop Problem: There is a building of 100 floors. If an egg drops from the Nth floor or
          above, it will break. If it's dropped from any floor below, it will not break. You're given two eggs. Find
          N, while minimizing the number of drops for the worst case.

         Hints: # 756, #233, #294, #333, #357, #374, #395

6.9 100 Lockers: There are 100 closed lockers in a hallway. A man begins by opening all 100 lockers.
          Next, he closes every second locker. Then, on his third pass, he toggles every third locker (closes it if
          it is open or opens it if it is closed). This process continues for 100 passes, such that on each pass i,
          the man toggles every ith locker. After his 100th pass in the hallway, in which he toggles only locker
          #100, how many lockers are open?

         Hints: # 739, # 772, #264, #306

6.10  Poison: You have 1000 bottles of soda, and exactly one is poisoned. You have 10 test strips which
      can be used to detect poison. A single drop of poison will turn the test strip positive permanently.
      You can put any number of drops on a test strip at once and you can reuse a test strip as many times
      as you 'd like (as long as the results are negative). However, you can only run tests once per day and
      it takes seven days to return a result. How would you figure out the poisoned bottle in as few days
      as possible?

      FOLLOW UP

      Write #code to simulate your approach.

      Hints: #746, #763, #783, #797, #205, #227, #230, #247, #249

Additional Problems: Moderate Problems (#16.5), Hard Problems (#17.19)
Hints start on page 662.

124   Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
         7

                             Object-Oriented Design

Object-oriented design questions require a candidate to sketch out the classes and methods to imple-
       ment technical problems or real-life objects. These problems give-or at least are believed to give-
an interviewer insight into your coding style.
These questions are not so much about regurgitating design patterns as they are about demonstrating that
you understand how to create elegant, maintainable object-oriented #code. Poor performance on this type
of question may raise serious red flags.

~ How to Approach

Regardless of whether the object is a physical item or a technical task, object-oriented design questions can
be tackled in similar ways.The following approach will work well for many problems.

Step 1: Handle Ambiguity
Object-oriented design (000) questions are often intentionally vague in order to test whether you'll make
assumptions or if you'll ask clarifying questions. After all, a developer who just #codes something without
understanding what she is expected to create wastes the company's time and money, and may create much
more serious issues.
When being asked an object-oriented design question, you should inquire who is going to use it and how

they are going to use it. Depending on the question, you may even want to go through the "six Ws": who,

what, where, when, how, why.
For example, suppose you were asked to describe the object-oriented design for a coffee maker.This seems
straightforward enough, right? Not quite.
Your coffee maker might be an industrial machine designed to be used in a massive restaurant servicing
hundreds of customers per hour and making ten different kinds of coffee products. Or it might be a very
simple machine, designed to be used by the elderly for just simple black coffee.These use cases will Signifi-
cantly impact your design.

Step 2: Define the Core Objects
Now that we understand what we're designing, we should consider what the "core objects" in a system
are. For example, suppose we are asked to do the object-oriented design for a restaurant. Our core objects
might be things like Table, Guest, Party, Order, Meal, Employee, Server, and Host.

  125
I Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

Step 3: Analyze Relationships

Having more or less decided on our core objects, we now want to analyze the relationships between the
objects. Which objects are members of which other objects? Do any objects inherit from any others? Are
relationships many-to-many or one -to -many?
For example, in the restaurant question, we may come up with the following design:

    Party should have an #array of Guests.
 Server and Host inherit from Employee.

    Each Table has one Party, but each Party may have multiple Tables .
    There is one Host for the Restaurant.
Be very careful here- you can often make incorrect assumptions. For example, a single Table may have
multiple Pa r t ies (as is common in the trendy "communal tables" at some restaurants). You should talk to
your interviewer about how general purpose your design should be.

Step 4: Investigate Actions
At this point, you should have the basic outline of your object-oriented design.What remains is to consider
the key actions that the objects w ill take and how they relate to each other. You may find that you have
forgotten some objects, and you will need to update your design.

For example, a Party walks into the Restaurant, and a Guest requests a Table from the Host. The
Host looks up the Reservation and, if it exists, assigns the Party to a Table . Otherwise, the Party
is added to the end of the list. When a Party leaves, the Table is freed and assigned to a new Party in
the list.

~ Design Patterns

Because interviewers are trying to test your capabilities and not your knowledge, design patterns are
mostly beyond the scope of an interview. However, the Singleton and Factory Method design patterns are
widely used in interviews, so we will cover them here.

There are far more design patterns than this book could possibly discuss. A great way to improve your soft-
ware engineering skills is to pick up a book that focuses on this area specifically.

Be careful you don't fall into a trap of constantly trying to find the "right" design pattern for a particular
problem. You should create the design that works for that problem. In some cases it might be an estab-
lished pattern, but in many other cases it is not.

Singleton Class

The Singleton pattern ensures that a class has only one instance and ensures access to the instance through
the application. It can be useful in cases where you have a "global" object with exactly one instance. For
example, we may want to implement Restaurant such that it has exactly one instance of Restaurant .

1 #public class Restaurant {

2       private static Restaurant _instance = #nullj

3       protected Re staurant ( ) { ... }

4       #public static Restaurant getlnstance() {

5       if (_instance == nUll ) {

6          instance = new Restaurant()j

7       }

   126  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                      Chapter 7 I Object-Oriented Design

8        return _instance;

9     }

Hl }

It should be noted that many people dislike the Singleton design pattern, even calling it an "anti-pattern:'
One reason for this is that it can interfere with unit testing.

Factory Method

The Factory Method offers an interface for creating an instance of a class, with its subclasses deciding

which class to instantiate. You might want to implement this with the creator class being abstract and not

providing an implementation for the Factory method. Or, you could have the Creator class be a concrete

class that provides an implementation for the Factory method. In this case, the Factory method would take

a parameter representing which class to instantiate.

1 #public class CardGame {

2     #public static CardGame createCardGame(GameType type) {

3        if (type == GameType.Poker) {

4           return new PokerGame();

5        } else if (type == GameType.BlackJack) {

6           return new BlackJackGame();

7        }

8        return #null;

9     }

10 }

Interview Questions

7.1 Deck of Cards: Design the #data structures for a generic deck of cards. Explain how you would
         subclass the #data structures to implement blackjack.

         Hints: #153, #275

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I'

7.2 Call Center: Imagine you have a call center with three levels of employees: respondent, manager,
         and director. An incoming telephone call must be first allocated to a respondent who is free. If the
         respondent can't handle the call, he or she must escalate the call to a manager. If the manager is not
         free or not able to handle it, then the call should be escalated to a director. Design the classes and
         #data structures for this problem. Implement a method dispatchCall() which assigns a call to
         the first available employee.

      Hints: #363

                                                                                                   pq 1)7

7.3 Jukebox: Design a musical jukebox using object-oriented principles.
         Hints: # 198

7.4 Parking Lot: Design a parking lot using object-oriented principles.
         Hints: #258

7.5 Online Book Reader: Design the #data structures for an online book reader system.
         Hints: #344

                                                                                                   r ,d

                                                        127
I Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

7.6 Jigsaw: Implement an NxN jigsaw puzzle. Design the #data structures and explain an #algorithm to

         solve the puzzle. You can assume that you have a fi tsWi th method which, when passed two

          puzzle edges, returns true if the two edges belong together.
         Hints: # 192, #238, #283
7.7 Chat Server: Explain how you would design a chat server. In particular, provide details about the
         various backend components, classes, and methods. What would be the hardest problems to solve?
         Hints: #213, #245, #271
7.8 Othello: Othello is played as follows: Each Othello piece is white on one side and black on the other.
          When a piece is surrounded by its opponents on both the left and right sides, or both the top and
          bottom, it is said to be captured and its color is flipped . On your turn, you must capture at least one
          of your opponent's pieces. The game ends when either user has no more valid moves. The win is
          assigned to the person with the most pieces. Implement the object-oriented design for Othello.
         Hints: # 179, #228
7.9 Circular #Array: Implement a Ci rc u la rArray class that supports an #array-like #data structure which
          can be efficiently rotated. If possible, the class should use a generic type (also called a template), and

         should support iteration via the standard for (Obj 0 : circularArray) notation.
         Hints: #389

  128 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                 Chapter 7 I Object-Oriented Design

7.10  Minesweeper: Design and implement a text-based Minesweeper game. Minesweeper is the classic
      single-player computer game where an NxN grid has B mines (or bombs) hidden across the grid. The
      remaining cells are either blank or have a number behind them.The numbers reflect the number of
      bombs in the surrounding eight cells. The user then uncovers a cell. If it is a bomb, the player loses.
      If it is a number, the number is exposed. If it is a blank cell, this cell and all adjacent blank cells (up to
      and including the surrounding numeric cells) are exposed. The player wins when all non-bomb cells
      are exposed. The player can also flag certain places as potential bombs. This doesn't affect game
      play, other than to block the user from accidentally clicking a cell that is thought to have a bomb.
      (Tip for the reader: if you're not familiar with this game, please playa few rounds online first.)

       This is a fully exposed board with 3      The player initially sees a board with
      bombs. This is not shown to the user.                   nothing exposed.

                   1 1 1                               ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
                                                       ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
                 1* 1                                  ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
                  2 2 2                                ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
                 1* 1                                  ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
                                                       ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
                   1 1 1                               ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
                              1 1 1

                          1* 1

      Clicking on cell (row = 1, col = 0)        The user wins when everything other
               would expose this:                    than bombs has been exposed.
                                                             11 1
              1 ? 7 7. 7 ?
              1?? ? ? ?                                     1 7 1
              2 ? 7? ? ?                                     2 2 2
              1 ? ? ? ? ?                                   1 ? 1
              1 1 1 ? ? ?                                    1 1 1

                       1 ? ? ?                                          1 1 1
                        1 ? ? ?                                        1 ? 1

      Hints: #351, #361, #377, #386, #399

                                                                                              P 1).

7.11 File System: Explain the #data structures and #algorithms that you would use to design an in-memory
          file system. Illustrate with an example in #code where possible.

         Hints: #141, #276
                                                                                                                     ) ,

7.12  Hash Table: Design and implement a hash table which uses chaining (linked lists) to handle colli-
      sions.

      Hints: #287, #307

Additional Questions: Threads and Locks (#16.3)
Hints start on page 662.

                                                   129
             8

        Recursion and Dynamic Programming

W hile there are a large number of recursive problems, many follow similar patterns. A good hint that a
        problem is recursive is that it can be built off of subproblems.

When you hear a problem beginning with the following statements, it's often (though not always) a good
candidate for recursion: "Design an #algorithm to compute the nth ..:; "Write #code to list the first n..:; "Imple-
ment a method to compute all..:; and so on.

I       Tip: In my experience coaching candidates, people typically have about 50% accuracy in their
        "this sounds like a recursive problem" instinct. Use that instinct, since that 50% is valuable. But

        don't be afraid to look at the problem in a different way, even if you initial ly thought it seemed

        recursive. There's also a 50% chance that you were wrong.

Practice makes perfect! The more problems you do, the easier it will be to recognize recursive problems.

 How to Approach

Recursive #solutions, by definition, are built off of #solutions to subproblems. Many times, this will mean
simply to compute f (n) by adding something, removing something, or otherwise changing the #solution

for f (n -1) . In other cases, you might solve the problem for the first half of the #data set, then the second

half, and then merge those results.

There are many ways you might divide a problem into subproblems.Three of the most common approaches
to develop an #algorithm are bottom-up, top-down, and half-and-half.

Bottom-Up Approach

The bottom-up approach is often the most intuitive. We start with knowing how to solve the problem
for a simple case, like a list with only one element. Then we figure out how to solve the problem for two
elements, then for three elements, and so on. The key here is to think about how you can build the #solution
for one case off of the previous case (or multiple previous cases).

Top-Down Approach

The top-down approach can be more complex since it's less concrete. But sometimes, it's the best way to
think about the problem.
In these problems, we think about how we can divide the problem for case N into subproblems.
Be careful of overlap between the cases.

   130  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                  Chapter 8 I Recursion and Dynamic Programming

Half-and-Half Approach
In addition to top-down and bottom-up approaches, it's often effective to divide the #data set in half.
For example, binary search works with a "half-and-half" approach. When we look for an element in a sorted
array, we first figure out which half of the #array contains the value. Then we recurse and search for it in that
half.
Merge sort is also a "half-and-half" approach. We sort each half of the #array and then merge together the
sorted halves.

~ Recursive vs.lterative #Solutions

Recursive #algorithms can be very space inefficient. Each recursive call adds a new layer to the stack, which
means that if your #algorithm recurses to a depth of n, it uses at least 0 (n) memory.

For this reason, it's often better to implement a recursive #algorithm iteratively. All recursive #algorithms can
be implemented iteratively, although sometimes the #code to do so is much more complex. Before diving
into recursive #code, ask yourself how hard it would be to implement it iteratively, and discuss the tradeoffs
with your interviewer.

~ Dynamic Programming & Memoization

Although people make a big deal about how scary dynamic programming problems are, there's really no
need to be afraid of them. In fact, once you get the hang of them, these can actually be very easy problems.

Dynamic programming is mostly just a matter of taking a recursive #algorithm and finding the overlapping
subproblems (that is, the repeated calls) . You then cache those results for future recursive calls.

Alternatively, you can study the pattern of the recursive calls and implement something iterative. You still
"cache" previous work.

I    A note on terminology: Some people call top-down dynamic programming "memoization" and
     only use "dynamic programming" to refer to bottom-up work. We do not make such a distinction

     here.We call both dynamic programming.

One of the simplest examples of dynamic programming is computing the nth Fibonacci number. A good
way to approach such a problem is often to implement it as a normal recursive #solution, and then add the
caching part.

Fibonacci Numbers
Let's walk through an approach to compute the nth Fibonacci number.

Recursive

We will start w ith a recursive implementation. Sounds simple, right?

1 int f ibonacci(int i) {

2    if ( i == e) return e;

3    if ( i == 1) return 1;

4    return fibonacci(i - 1) + fibonacci(i - 2);

5 }

                                             CrackingTheCoding lnterview.com 16th Edition 131
I Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

What is the runtime of this function? Think for a second before you answer.

If you said O(n) or O(n2) (as many people do), think again. Study the #code path that the #code takes.
Drawing the #code paths as a tree (that is, the recursion tree) is useful on this and many recursive problems.

                                                ______ fib( 5) _____

                                            fib(41                    . / "fib(3)
                                                ~
           fib(3.) / '                                fib(2)          fib(2)     fib(l)
   ./"
   fib(2)                                           /"\..         /"\.
                     fib(l) fib(l) fib(S)                         fib(l) fib(S)

   /"\.
   fib(l) fib(S)

Observe that the leaves on the tree are all fib (1) and fib (e). Those signify the base cases.

The total number of #nodes in the tree will represent the runtime, since each call only does 0 (1) work
outside of its recursive calls.Therefore, the number of calls is the runtime.

I  Tip: Remember this for future problems. Drawing the recursive calls as a tree is a great way to
   figure out the runtime of a recursive #algorithm.

How many #nodes are in the tree? Until we get down to the base cases (leaves), each #node has two children.
Each #node branches out twice.

The root #node has two children. Each of those children has two children (so four children total in the "grand-
children" leve/). Each of those grandchildren has two children, and so on. If we do this n times, we'll have
roughly O( 2n) #nodes. This gives us a runtime of roughly O( 2n) .

I  Actually, it's slightly better than 0 (2n) .Ifyou lookat the subtree, you might notice that (excluding
   the leaf #nodes and those immediately above it) the right subtree of any #node is always smaller

   than the left subtree. If they were the same size, we'd have an O( 2n) runtime. But since the right
   and left subtrees are not the same size, the true runtime is closer to O( 1. 6n). Saying O( 2n) is still

   technically correct though as it describes an upper bound on the runtime (see "Big 0, Big Theta,

   and Big Omega" on page 39). Either way, we still have an exponential runtime.

Indeed, if we implemented this on a computer, we'd see the number of seconds increase exponentially.
                                     80
                                     60
                                          40

                  o                         10      20        30  40

                  Seconds to Generate Nth Fibonacci

We should look for a way to optimize this.

   132 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                      Chapter 8 I Recursion and Dynamic Programming

Top-Down Dynamic Programming (or Memoizationj

Study the recursion tree. Where do you see identical #nodes?

There are lots of identical #nodes. For example, fib (3) appears twice and fib(2) appears three times. Why
should we recompute these from scratch each time?

In fact, when we call fib (n), we shouldn't have to do much more than 0 (n) calls, since there's only O( n)
possible values we can throw at fib. Each time we compute fib (i), we should just cache this result and
use it later.

This is exactly what memoization is.

With just a small modification, we can tweak this function to run in O( n) time. We simply cache the results
offibonacci(i) between calls.

1 int fibonacci(int n) {

2     return fibonacci(n, new int[n + 1]);

3 }

4

5 int fibonacci(int i, int[] memo) {

6 if (i == e I I i == 1) return i;

7     == if (memo[i] e) {

8

9     memo[i] = fibonacci(i - 1, memo) + fibonacci(i - 2, memo);

10 }

11 return memo[i];

12 }

While the first recursive function may take over a minute to generate the 50th Fibonacci number on a
typical computer, the dynamic programming method can generate the 10,OOOth Fibonacci number in just
fractions of a millisecond. (Of course, with this exact #code, the int would have overflowed very early on.)

Now, if we draw the recursion tree, it looks something like this (the black boxes represent cached calls that
returned immediately):

                                      ./""fib(_4~____ fib(S) ~
                                                      ~
                            ""- fib(3)

                           /'
                    ;b~               fib(l)

      fib(l) fib(a)

How many #nodes are in this tree now? We might notice that the tree now just shoots straight down, to a
depth of roughly n. Each #node of those #nodes has one other child, resulting in roughly 2n children in the
tree. This gives us a runtime of 0 (n).

Often it can be useful to picture the recursion tree as something like this:

                                                           _____ fib(S) _____

      ~                               fib(4~                           fib(3)

                                              fib(2)         ~ ~(1)
                                        /'\.
                                      fib(l) fib(a)

This is not actually how the recursion occurred. However, by expanding the further up #nodes rather than the

                                                       133
I Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

lower #nodes, you have a tree that grows wide before it grows deep. (It 's like doing this breadth-first rather
than depth-first.) Sometimes thi s makes it easier to compute the number of #nodes in the tree. All you're
really doing is changing which #nodes you expand and which ones return cached values. Try this if you're
stuck on computing the runtime of a dynamic programming problem.

Bottom-Up Dynamic Programming

We can also take this approach and implement it with bottom-up dynamic programming. Think about
doing the same things as the recursive memoized approach, but in reverse.

First, we compute fib (1) and fib (0), which are already known from the base cases. Then we use those

to compute fib (2). Then we use the prior answers to compute fib (3), then fib (4) , and so on.

1 int fibonacci(int n) {

2     if (n == 0) r eturn 0;

3     else if (n == 1) return 1;

4

5     int[] memo new int[n];

6     memo[0] = 0;

7     memo[l] = 1;

8     for (int i = 2; i < n; i++) {

9        memo[i] = memo[i - 1] + memo[i - 2];

10 }

11 return memo[n - 1] + memo[n - 2];

12 }

If you really think about how this works, you only use memo [i] for memo [i+l] and memo [i+2]. You don't
need it after that. Therefore, we can get rid of the memo table and just store a few variables.

1 int fibonacci(int n) {

2     if (n == 0) return 0;

3     int a = 0;

4     int b = 1;

5     for (int i = 2; i < n; i++) {

6        int c = a + b;

7        a b )'

8        b = c;

9     }

10 return a + b;

11 }

This is basically storing the results from the last two Fibonacci values into a and b. At each iteration, we

computethenextvalue(c = a + b)andthenmove(b, c = a + b) into (a, b) .

This explanation might seem like overkill for such a simple problem, but t ruly understanding this process
will make more difficult problems much easier. Going through the problems in this chapter, many of which
use dynamic programming, will help solidify your understanding.

Additional Reading: Proof by Induction  .

Interview Questions

8.1 Triple Step: A child is running up a staircase with n steps and can hop either 1 step, 2 steps, or 3
          steps at a time. Implement a method to count how many possible ways the child can run up the
          stairs.

          Hints: # 152, # 178, #217, #237, #262, #359

   134 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
           I Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

8.2 Robot in a Grid: Imagine a robot sitting on the upper left corner of grid with r rows and c columns.
         The robot can only move in two directions, right and down, but certain cells are "off limits" such that
          the robot cannot step on them. Design an #algorithm to find a path for the robot from the top left to
          the bottom right.

         Hints: #331, #360, #388

8.3 Magic Index: A magic index in an #array A[e ... n -1] is defined to be an index such that A[ i] =

        i. Given a sorted #array of distinct integers, write a method to find a magic index, if one exists, in

          #array A.

FOLLOW UP

What if the values are not distinct?

Hints: # 170, #204, #240, #286, #340

                                                                                   p~ !40

8.4 Power Set: Write a method to return all subsets of a set.
         Hints: #273, #290, #338, #354, #373

8.5 Recursive Multiply: Write a recursive function to multiply two positive integers without using the

        * operator. You can use addition, subtraction, and bit shifting, but you should minimize the number

          of those operations.
         Hints: # 166, #203, #227, #234, #246, #280

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ('

8.6 Towers of Hanoi: In the classic problem of the Towers of Hanoi, you have 3 towers and N disks of
          different sizes which can slide onto any tower. The puzzle starts with disks sorted in ascending order
          of size from top to bottom (Le., each disk sits on top of an even larger one). You have the following
          constraints:
         (1) Only one disk can be moved at a time.
         (2) A disk is slid off the top of one tower onto another tower.
         (3) A disk cannot be placed on top of a smaller disk.
         Write a program to move the disks from the first tower to the last using stacks.
         Hints: # 144, #224, #250, #272, #318

                                                                                                                                                                                             [ ' f ..

8.7 Permutations without Dups: Write a method to compute all permutations of a #string of unique
          characters.
         Hints: #150, #185, #200, #267, #278, #309, #335, #356
                                                                                                                                               ; }

8.8 Permutations with Dups: Write a method to compute all permutations of a #string whose charac-
          ters are not necessarily unique. The list of permutations should not have duplicates.
         Hints: # 161, #190, #222, #255

                                        135
I Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

8.9 Parens: Implement an #algorithm to print all valid (e.g., properly opened and closed) combinations
          of n pairs of parentheses.

         EXAMPLE

         Input: 3

    Output: () ))J ) (,  () J () ( (, () () ()

         Hints: #138, #174, #187, #209, #243, #265, #295

8.10  Paint Fill: Implement the "paint nil" function that one might see on many image editing programs.
      That is, given a screen (represented by a two-dimensional #array of colors), a point, and a new color,
      nil in the surrounding area until the color changes from the original color.

      Hints: #364, #382

8.11 Coins: Given an innnite number of quarters (25 cents), dimes (10 cents), nickels (5 cents), and
          pennies (1 cent), write #code to calculate the number of ways of representing n cents.
         Hints: #300, #324, #343, #380, #394

8.12  Eight Queens: Write an #algorithm to print all ways of arranging eight queens on an 8x8 chess board
      so that none of them share the same row, column, or diagonal. In this case, "diagonal" means all
      diagonals, not just the two that bisect the board.

      Hints: #308, #350, #371

8.13  Stack of Boxes: You have a stack of n boxes, with widths Wi ' heights hi ' and depths di . The boxes
      cannot be rotated and can only be stacked on top of one another if each box in the stack is strictly
      larger than the box above it in width, height, and depth. Implement a method to compute the
      height of the tallest possible stack.The height of a stack is the sum of the heights of each box.

      Hints: #155, #194, #214, #260, #322, #368, #378

8.14  Boolean Evaluation: Given a boolean expression consisting of the symbols e (false), 1 (true), &
      (AND), I (OR), and" (XOR), and a desired boolean result value result, implement a function to
      count the number of ways of parenthesizing the expression such that it evaluates to result .

      EXAMPLE

      countEval("1"eleI1"J false) -) 2
      countEval("e&e&e&l"lle"J true) -) 1e
      Hints: #148, #168, #197, #305, #327

Additional Questions: Linked Lists (#2.2, #2.5, #2.6), Stacks and Queues (#3.3), Trees and Graphs (#4.2, #4.3,
#4.4, #4.5, #4.8, #4.10, #4.11 , #4.12), Math and Logic Puzzles (#6.6), Sorting and Searching (#10.5, #10.9,
#10.10), C++ (#12.8), Moderate Problems (#16.11), Hard Problems (#17.4, #17.6, #17.8, #17.12, #17.13,
#17.15, #17.16, #17.24, #17.25).

Hints start on page 662.

136 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
    9

System Design and Scalability

Despite how intimidating they seem, scalability questions can be among the easiest questions. There
      are no "gotchas;' no tricks, and no fancy #algorithms-at least not usually. What trips up many people is
that they believe there's something "magic" to these problems- some hidden bit of knowledge.

It's not like that. These questions are simply designed to see how you would perform in the real world. If you
were asked by your manager to design some system, what would you do?

That's why you should approach it just like this. Tackle the problem by doing it just like you would at work.
Ask questions. Engage the interviewer. Discuss the tradeoffs.

We will touch on some key concepts in this chapter, but recognize it's not really about memorizing these
concepts. Yes, understanding some big components of system design can be useful, but it's much more
about the process you take. There are good #solutions and bad #solutions.There is no perfect #solution.

~ Handling the Questions

 Communicate: A key goal of system design questions is to evaluate your ability to communicate. Stay
    engaged with the interviewer. Ask them questions. Be open about the issues of your system.

 Go broad first: Don't dive straight into the #algorithm part or get excessively focused on one part.
 Use the whiteboard: Using a whiteboard helps your interviewer follow your proposed design. Get up to

    the whiteboard in the very beginning and use it to draw a picture of what you 're proposing.

 Acknowledge interviewer concerns: Your interviewer w ill likely jump in with concerns. Don't brush
    them off; validate them . Acknowledge the issues your interviewer pOints out and make changes accord-
    ingly.

 Be careful about assumptions: An incorrect assumption can dramatically change the problem. For
    example, if your system produces analytics / statistics for a #dataset, it matters whether those analytics
    must be totally up to date.

 State your assumptions explicitly:When you do make assumptions, state them.This allows your inter-
    viewer to correct you if you're mistaken, and shows that you at least know what assumptions you're
    making.
    Estimate when necessary: In many cases, you might not have the #data you need. For example, if you 're
    designing a web crawler, you might need to estimate how much space it will take to store all the URLs.
    You can estimate this with other #data you know.

 Drive: As the candidate, you should stay in the driver's seat. This doesn't mean you don't talk to your

    interviewer; in fact, you must talk to your interviewer. However, you should be driving through the ques-

  137
Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

    tion. Ask questions. Be open about tradeoffs. Continue to go deeper. Continue to make improvements.
These questions are largely about the process rather than the ultimate design.

~ Design: Step-By-Step

If your manager asked you to design a system such as TinyURL, you probably wouldn't just say, "Okay'; then
lock yourself in your office to design it by yourself. You would probably have a lot more questions before
you do it. This is the way you should handle it in an interview.

Step 1: Scope the Problem
You can't design a system if you don't know what you 're designing. Scoping the problem is important
because you want to ensure that you 're building what the interviewer wants and because this might be
something that interviewer is specifically evaluating.
If you're asked something such as "Design TinyURL'; you 'll want to understand what exactly you need to
implement. Will people be able to specify their own short URLs? Or will it all be auto-generated? Will you
need to keep track of any stats on the clicks? Should the URLs stay alive forever, or do they have a timeout?
These are questions that must be answered before going further.
Make a list here as well of the major features or use cases. For example, for TinyURL, it might be:
 Shortening a URL to a TinyURL.

    Analytics for a URL.
    Retrieving the URL associated with a TinyURL.
    User accounts and link management.

Step 2: Make Reasonable Assumptions
It's okay to make some assumptions (when necessary), but they should be reasonable. For example, it
would not be reasonable to assume that your system only needs to process 100 users per day, or to assume
that you have infinite memory available.
However, it might be reasonable to design for a max of one million new URLs per day. Making this assump-
tion can help you calculate how much #data your system might need to store.
Some assumptions might take some "product sense" (which is not a bad thing). For example, is it okay for
the #data to be stale by a max of ten minutes? That all depends. If it takes 10 minutes for a just-entered URL
to work, that's a deal-breaking issue. People usually want these URLs to be active immediately. However, if
the statistics are ten minutes out of date, that might be okay. Talk to your interviewer about these sorts of
assumptions.

Step 3: Draw the Major Components
Get up out of that chair and go to the whiteboard. Draw a diagram of the major components. You might
have something like a frontend server (or set of servers) that pull #data from the backend 's #data store. You
might have another set of servers that crawl the internet for some #data, and another set that process
analytics. Draw a picture of what this system might look like.
Walk through your system from end-to-end to provide a flow. A user enters a new URL. Then what?

  138 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

It may help here to ignore major scalability challenges and just pretend that the simple, obvious approaches
will be okay. You'll handle the big issues in Step 4.

Step 4: Identify the Key Issues
Once you have a basic design in mind, focus on the key issues. What will be the bottlenecks or major chal-
lenges in the system?
For example, if you were designing TinyURL, one situation you might consider is that while some URLs will
be infrequently accessed, others can suddenly peak. This might happen if a URL is posted on Reddit or
another popular forum. You don't necessarily want to constantly hit the #database.
Your interviewer might provide some guidance here. If so, take this guidance and use it.

Step 5: Redesign for the Key Issues
Once you have identified the key issues, it's time to adjust your design for it. You might find that it involves
a major redesign or just some minor tweaking (like using a cache).
Stay up at the whiteboard here and update your diagram as your design changes.
Be open about any limitations in your design. Your interviewer will likely be aware of them, so it's important
to communicate that you're aware of them, too.

 #Algorithms that Scale: Step-By-Step

In some cases, you 're not being asked to design an entire system. You're just being asked to design a single
feature or #algorithm, but you have to do it in a scalable way. Or, there might be one #algorithm part that is
the "real" focus of a broader design question.
In these cases, try the following approach.

Step 1: Ask Questions
As in the earlier approach, ask questions to make sure you really understand the question. There might
be details the interviewer left out (intentionally or unintentionally). You can't solve a problem if you don't
understand exactly what the problem is.

Step 2: Make Believe
Pretend that the #data can all fit on one machine and there are no memory limitations. How would you solve
the problem? The answer to this question will provide the general outline for your #solution.

Step 3: Get Real
Now go back to the original problem. How much #data can you fit on one machine, and what problems will
occur when you split up the #data? Common problems include figuring out how to logically divide the #data
up, and how one machine would identify where to look up a different piece of #data.

Step 4: Solve Problems
Finally, think about how to solve the issues you identified in Step 2. Remember that the #solution for each
issue might be to actually remove the issue entirely, or it might be to simply mitigate the issue. Usually, you

  139
Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

can continue using (with modifications) the approach you outlined in Step 1, but occasionally you will need
to fundamentally alter the approach.
Note that an iterative approach is typically useful. That is, once you have solved the problems from Step 3,
new problems may have emerged, and you must tackle those as well.
Your goal is not to re-architect a complex system that companies have spent millions of dollars building,
but rather to demonstrate that you can analyze and solve problems. Poking holes in your own #solution is a
fantastic way to demonstrate this.

~ Key Concepts

While system design questions aren't really tests of what you know, certain concepts can make things a lot
easier. We will give a brief overview here. All of these are deep, complex topics, so we encourage you to use
online resources for more research.

Horizontal vs. Vertical Scaling

A system can be scaled one of two ways.
    Vertical scaling means increasing the resources of a specific #node. For example, you might add addi-
    tional memory to a server to improve its ability to handle load changes.

 Horizontal scaling means increasing the number of #nodes. For example, you might add additional
    servers, thus decreasing the load on anyone server.

Vertical scaling is generally easier than horizontal scaling, but it's limited. You can only add so much memory
or disk space.

load Balancer

Typically, some frontend parts of a scalable website will be thrown behind a load balancer. This allows a
system to distribute the load evenly so that one server doesn't crash and take down the whole system .To
do so, of course, you have to build out a network of cloned servers that all have essentially the same #code
and access to the same #data.

Database Denormalization and NoSQl

Joins in a relational #database such as SQl can get very slow as the system grows bigger. For this reason, you
would generally avoid them.
Denormalization is one part of this. Denormalization means adding redundant information into a #database
to speed up reads. For example, imagine a #database describing projects and tasks (where a project can have
multiple tasks). You might need to get the project name and the task information. Rather than doing a join
across these tables, you can store the project name within the task table (in addition to the project table).
Or, you can go with a NoSQl #database. A NoSQl #database does not support joins and might structure #data
in a different way. It is designed to scale better.

Database Partitioning (Sharding)

Sharding means splitting the #data across multiple machines while ensuring you have a way of figuring out
which #data is on which machine.
A few common ways of partitioning include:

140  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                           Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

    Vertical Partitioning: This is basically partitioning by feature. For example, if you were building a social
    network, you might have one partition for tables relating to profiles, another one for messages, and so
    on . One drawback of this is that if one of these tables gets very large, you might need to repartition that
    #database (possibly using a different partitioning scheme).
    Key-Based (or Hash-Based) Partitioning: This uses some part of the #data (for example an ID) to parti-

   tion it. A very simple way to do this is to allocate N servers and put the #data on mod (key J n). One issue

    with this is that the number of servers you have is effectively fixed. Adding additional servers means
    reallocating all the #data-a very expensive task.
    Directory-Based Partitioning: In this scheme, you maintain a lookup table for where the #data can be
    found. This makes it relatively easy to add additional servers, but it comes with two major drawbacks.
    First, the lookup table can be a single point of failure. Second, constantly accessing this table impacts
    performance.
Many architectures actually end up using multiple partitioning schemes.

Caching

An in-memory cache can deliver very rapid results. It is a simple key-value pairing and typically sits between
your application layer and your #data store.

When an application requests a piece of information, it first tries the cache. If the cache does not contain the
key, it will then look up the #data in the #data store. (At this point, the #data might-or might not-be stored
in the #data store.)

When you cache, you might cache a query and its results directly. Or, alternatively, you can cache the specific
object (for example, a rendered version of a part of the website, or a list of the most recent blog posts).

Asynchronous Processing & Queues

Slow operations should ideally be done asynchronously. Otherwise, a user might get stuck waiting and
waiting for a process to complete.

In some cases, we can do this in advance (Le., we can pre-process) . For example, we might have a queue of
jobs to be done that update some part of the website. If we were running a forum, one of these jobs might
be to re-render a page that lists the most popular posts and the number of comments. That list might end
up being slightly out of date, but that's perhaps okay. It's better than a user stuck waiting on the website
to load simply because someone added a new comment and invalidated the cached version of this page.

In other cases, we might tell the user to wait and notify them when the process is done. You've probably
seen this on websites before. Perhaps you enabled some new part of a website and it says it needs a few
minutes to import your #data, but you'll get a notification when it's done.

Networking Metrics

Some ofthe most important metrics around networking include:
 Bandwidth:This is the maximum amount of #data that can be transferred in a unit of time. It is typically

    expressed in bits per second (or some similar ways, such as gigabytes per second).
    Throughput: Whereas bandwidth is the maximum #data that can be transferred in a unit of time,
    throughput is the actual amount of #data that is transferred.
    Latency:This is how long it takes #data to go from one end to the other. That is, it is the delay between the
    sender sending information (even a very small chunk of #data) and the receiver receiving it.

(rackingThe(odinglnterview.com 16th Edition  141
Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

Imagine you have a conveyor belt that transfers items across a factory. Latency is the time it takes an item to
go from one side to another. Throughput is the number of items that roll off the conveyor belt per second.

    Building a fatter conveyor belt will not change latency. It will, however, change throughput and band-
    width. You can get more items on the belt, thus transferring more in a given unit of time.
    Shortening the belt will decrease latency, since items spend less time in transit. It won't change the
    throughput or bandwidth.The same number of items will roll off the belt per unit of time.
    Making a faster conveyor belt will change all three. The time it takes an item to travel across the factory
    decreases. More items will also roll off the conveyor belt per unit of time.
    Bandwidth is the number of items that can be transferred per unit of time, in the best possible condi-
    tions.Throughput is the time it really takes, when the machines perhaps aren't operating smoothly.

Latency can be easy to disregard, but it can be very important in particular situations. For example, if you're
playing certain online games, latency can be a very big deal. How can you playa typical online sports game
(like a two-player football game) if you aren't notified very quickly of your opponent's movement? Addition-
ally, unlike throughput where at least you have the option of speeding things up through #data compres-
sion, there is often little you can do about latency.

MapReduce
MapReduce is often associated with Google, but it's used much more broadly than that. A MapReduce
program is typically used to process large amounts of #data.

As its name suggests, a MapReduce program requires you to write a Map step and a Reduce step.The rest
is handled by the system.
 Map takes in some #data and emits a <key J value> pair.

    Reduce takes a key and a set of associated values and "reduces" them in some way, emitting a new key
    and value. The results of this might be fed back into the Reduce program for more reducing.
MapReduce allows us to do a lot of processing in parallel, which makes processing huge amounts of #data
more scalable.

For more information, see "MapReduce" on page 642.

~ Considerations

In addition to the earlier concepts to learn, you should consider the following issues when designing a
system .

    Failures: Essentially any part of a system can fail. You'll need to plan for many or all of these failures.
    Availability and Reliability: Availability is a function of the percentage of time the system is opera-
    tional. Reliability is a function of the probability that the system is operational for a certain unit of time.
    Read-heavy vs. Write-heavy: Whether an application will do a lot of reads or a lot of writes impacts the
    design. If it's write-heavy, you could consider queuing up the writes (but think about potential failure
    here!). If it 's read-heavy, you might want to cache. Other design decisions could change as well .
 Security: Security threats can, of course, be devastating for a system . Think about the types of issues a
    system might face and design around those.
This is just to get you started with the potential issues for a system . Remember to be open in your interview
about the tradeoffs.

142  Crac king the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                           Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

~ There is no "perfect" system.

There is no single design for TinyURL or Google Maps or any other system that works perfectly (although
there are a great number that would work terribly). There are always tradeoffs. Two people could have
substantially different designs for a system, with both being excellent given different assumptions.
Your goal in these problems is to be able to understand use cases, scope a problem, make reasonable
assumptions, create a solid design based on those assumptions, and be open about the weaknesses of your
design. Do not expect something perfect.

~ Example Problem

Given a list of millions ofdocuments, how would you find all documents that contain a list of words? The words
can appear in any order, but they must be complete words. That is, "book" does not match "bookkeeper."
Before we start solving the problem, we need to understand whether this is a one time only operation, or if
this findWords procedure will be called repeatedly. Let's assume that we w ill be calling findWord s many
times for the same set of documents, and, therefore, we can accept the burden of pre-processing.

Step 1
The first step is to pretend we just have a few dozen documents. How would we implement findWords in
this case? (Tip: stop here and try to solve this yourself before reading on.)
One way to do this is to pre-process each document and create a hash table index. This hash table would
map from a word to a list of the documents that contain that word.

      "books" -> {doc2, doc3, doc6, docS}
      "many" - > {docl, doc3, doc7, docS, doc9}
To search for "many books;'we would simply do an intersection on the values for "books" and "many'; and
return {doc 3, doc8} as the result.

Step 2
Now go back to the original problem. What problems are introduced with millions of documents? For
starters, we probably need to divide up the documents across many machines. Also, depending on a variety
of factors, such as the number of possible words and the repetition of words in a document, we may not be
able to fit the full hash table on one machine. Let's assume that this is the case.
This division introduces the following key concerns:
1. How will we divide up our hash table? We could divide it up by keyword, such that a given machine

    contains the full document list for a given word. Or, we could divide by document, such that a machine
    contains the keyword mapping for only a subset of the documents.
2. Once we decide how to divide up the #data, we may need to process a document on one machine and
    push the results off to other machines. What does this process look like? (Note: if we divide the hash
    table by document, this step may not be necessary.)
3. We will need a way of knowing which machine holds a piece of #data. What does this lookup table look
    like, and where is it stored?
These are just three concerns.There may be many others.

                                                                           143
Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

Step 3

In Step 3, we find #solutions to each of these issues. One #solution is to divide up the words alphabetically by
keyword, such that each machine controls a range of words (e.g., "after" through "apple").

We can implement a simple #algorithm in which we iterate through the keywords alphabetically, storing as
much #data as possible on one machine. When that machine is full, we can move to the next machine.

The advantage of this approach is that the lookup table is small and simple (since it must only specify a
range of values), and each machine can store a copy of the lookup table. However, the disadvantage is that
if new documents or words are added, we may need to perform an expensive shift of keywords.

To find all the documents that match a list of #strings, we would first sort the list and then send each machine
a lookup request for the #strings that the machine owns. For example, if our #string is "after builds
boat amaze banana", machine 1 would get a lookup request for {"after", "amaze"}.

Machine 1 looks up the documents containing "after" and "amaze;'and performs an intersection on these
document lists. Machine 3 does the same for {"banana", "boat", "builds"}, and intersects their
lists.

In the final step, the initial machine would do an intersection on the results from Machine 1 and Machine 3.

The following diagram explains this process.

        l "after builds boat amaze banana" J

        Machine 1: "after amaze"                Machine 3: "builds boat banana"

        "after" - ) doc1, doc5, doc7            "builds" - ) doc3, doc4, doc5
        "amaze" -) doc2, doc5, doc7             "boat" -) doc2, doc3, doc5
                                                "banana" - ) doc3, doc4, doc5

        {doc5 doc7}  #solution = doc5            {doc3 doc5}

             I                                         I

Interview Questions

These questions are designed to mirror a real interview, so they will not always be well defined.Think about
what questions you would ask your interviewer and then make reasonable assumptions. You may make
different assumptions than us, and that will lead you to a very different design.That's okay!

9.1 Stock #Data: Imagine you are building some sort of service that will be called by up to 1,000 client
          applications to get simple end-of-day stock price information (open, close, high, low). You may
          assume that you already have the #data, and you can store it in any format you wish. How would you
          design the client-facing service that provides the information to client applications? You are respon-
          sible for the development, rollout, and ongoing monitoring and maintenance of the feed. Describe
          the different methods you considered and why you would recommend your approach.Your service
          can use any technologies you wish, and can distribute the information to the client applications in
          any mechanism you choose.
         Hints: #385, #396

144 Cracking the Coding Interview. 6th Edition
                               Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

9.2 Social Network: How would you design the #data structures for a very large social network like Face-
          book or Linkedln? Describe how you would design an #algorithm to show the shortest path between

        two people (e.g., Me -> Bob -> Susan -> Jason -> You) .

Hints: #270, #285, #304, #327

                                                                                                   ,   .Il

9.3 Web Crawler: If you were designing a web crawler, how would you avoid getting into infinite loops?
         Hints: #334, #353, #365

9.4 Duplicate URLs: You have 10 billion URLs. How do you detect the duplicate documents? In this
          case, assume "duplicate" means that the URLs are identical.

Hints: #326, #347

                                                                                                  t j qr

9.5 Cache: Imagine a web server for a simplified search engine. This system has 100 machines to
          respond to search queries, which may then call out using processSearch(string query) to
          another cluster of machines to actually get the result. The machine which responds to a given query
          is chosen at random, so you cannot guarantee that the same machine will always respond to the
          same request. The method processSearch is very expensive. Design a caching mechanism for
          the most recent queries. Be sure to explain how you would update the cache when #data changes.

         Hints: #259, #274, #293, #377

9.6 Sales Rank: A large eCommerce company wishes to list the best-selling products, overall and by
          category. For example, one product might be the #1 056th best-selling product overall but the #13th
          best-selling product under "Sports Equipment" and the #24th best-selling product under "Safety."
          Describe how you would design this system.

         Hints: #742, #758, #776, #789, #208, #223, #236, #244

9.7 Personal Financial Manager: Explain how you would design a personal financial manager (like
          Mint.com) . This system would connect to your bank accounts, analyze your spending habits, and
          make recommendations.

         Hints: #762, #780, #799, #272, #247, #276

9.8 Pastebin: Design a system like Pastebin, where a user can enter a piece of text and get a randomly
          generated URL to access it.

         Hints: #765, #784, #206, #232

Additional Questions: Object-Oriented Design (#7.7)
Hints start on page 662.

                                                       145
       10

     Sorting and Searching

Understanding the common sorting and searching #algorithms is incredibly valuable, as many sorting
       and searching problems are tweaks of the well-known #algorithms. A good approach is therefore to run
through the different sorting #algorithms and see if one applies particularly well.
For example, suppose you are asked the following question: Given a very large #array of Person objects,
sort the people in increasing order of age.
We're given two interesting bits of knowledge here:
1. It's a large #array, so efficiency is very important.
2. We are sorting based on ages, so we know the values are in a small range.
By scanning through the various sorting #algorithms, we might notice that bucket sort (or radix sort) would
be a perfect candidate for this #algorithm. In fact, we can make the buckets small (just 1 year each) and get

o(n) running time.

~ Common Sorting #Algorithms

Learning (or re-Iearning) the common sorting #algorithms is a great way to boost your performance. Of the
five #algorithms explained below, Merge Sort, Quick Sort and Bucket Sort are the most commonly used in
interviews.

Bubble Sort IRuntime: 0(n 2) average and worst case. Memory: 0(1).

In bubble sort, we start at the beginning of the #array and swap the first two elements if the first is greater
than the second. Then, we go to the next pair, and so on, continuously making sweeps of the #array until it is
sorted. In doing so, the smaller items slowly"bubble" up to the beginning of the list.

Selection Sort I Runtime: O( n2) average and worst case. Memory: 0 (1) .

Selection sort is the child's #algorithm: simple, but inefficient. Find the smallest element using a linear scan
and move it to the front (swapping it with the front element) . Then, find the second smallest and move it,
again doing a linear scan . Continue doing this until all the elements are in place.

I Merge Sort Runtime: O( n log (n) ) average and worst case. Memory: Depends.

Merge sort divides the #array in half, sorts each of those halves, and then merges them back together. Each
of those halves has the same sorting #algorithm applied to it. Eventually, you are merging just two single-
element #arrays. It is the "merge" part that does all the heavy lifting.

146  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                           Chapter 10 I Sorting and Searching

The merge method operates by copying all the elements from the target #array segment into a helper #array,
keeping track of where the start of the left and right halves should be (helperLeft and helperRight).
We then iterate through helper, copying the smaller element from each half into the #array. At the end, we
copy any remaining elements into the target #array.

1 void me rgesort(int[] #array) {

2 int[] helper = new int[array.length]j

3 mergesort(array, helper, 8, #array.length - l)j

4 }

5

6 void mergesort(int[] #array, int[] helper, int low, int high) {

7 if (lOW < high) {

8     int middle = (low + high) I 2j

9     mergesort(array, helper, low, middle)j // Sort left half

18    mergesort(array, helper, middle+1, high) j // Sort right half

11    merge(array, helper, low, middle, high)j // Merge them

12 }

13 }

14

15 void merge(int[] #array, int[] helper, int low, int middle, int high) {

16 1* Copy both halves into a helper #array *1

17 for (int i = lowj i <= highj i++) {

18    helper[i] = #array[i]j

19 }

28

21 int helperLeft = lowj
22 int helperRight = middle + 1j
23 int current = lowj

24

25 1* Iterate through helper #array. Compare the left and right half, copying back
26 * the smaller element from the two halves into the original #array. *1

27 while (helperLeft <= middle && helperRight <= high) {

28    if (helper[helperLeft] <= helper[helperRight]) {

29       #array[current] = helper[helperLeft]j

38       helperLeft++j

31    } else { // If right element is smaller than left element

32       #array[current] = helper[helperRight]j

33       helperRight++j

34    }

35    cu r r ent++j

36 }

37
38 1* Copy the rest of the left side of the #array into the target #array *1

39 int remaining = middle - helperLeftj

48 for (int i = 8j i <= remainingj i++) {

41    #array[current + i) = helper[helperLeft + i]j

42 }

43 }

You may notice that only the remaining elements from the left half of the helper #array are copied into the
target #array. Why not the right half? The right half doesn't need to be copied because it's already there.

Consider, for example, an #array like [1, 4, 5 // 2, 8, 9] (the" I I"indicates the partition point). Prior

to merging the two halves, both the helper #array and the target #array segment will end with [8, 9]. Once
we copy over four elements (1, 4, 5, and 2) into the target #array, the [8, 9] will still be in place in both
arrays. There's no need to copy them over.

                                           147
Chapter 10 I Sorting and Searching

The space complexity of merge sort is 0 (n) due to the auxiliary space used to merge parts of the #array.

Quick Sort I Runtime: 0 (n log (n)) average, 0 (n2) worst case. Memory: 0 (log (n) ) .

In quick sort, we pick a random element and partition the #array, such that all numbers that are less than the
partitioning element come before all elements that are greater than it. The partitioning can be performed
efficiently through a series of swaps (see below).

If we repeatedly partition the #array (and its sub-arrays) around an element, the #array will eventually become

sorted. However, as the partitioned element is not guaranteed to be the median (or anywhere near the

median), our sorting could be very slow.This is the reason for the 0 (n 2) worst case runtime.

1 void quickSort(int[] arr, int left, int right) {

2       int index = partition(arr, left, right);

3       if (left < index - 1) { // Sort left half

4          quickSort(arr, left, index - 1);

5       }

6       if (index < right) { // Sort right half

7          quickSort(arr, index, right);

8 }

9 }

113

11 int partition(int[] arr, int left, int right) {

12 int pivot = arr[(left + right) I 2]; // Pick pivot point

13 while (left <= right) {

14         // Find element on left that should be on right

15         while (arr[left] < pivot) left++;

16

17         // Find element on right that should be on left

18         while (arr[right] > pivot) right- - ;

19

213        // Swap elements, and move left and right indices

21         if (left <= right) {

22            swap(arr, left, right); // swaps elements

23            left++;

24            right--;

25         }

26      }

27 return left;

28 }

I Radix Sort Runtime: O( kn) (see below)

Radix sort is a sorting #algorithm for integers (and some other #data types) that takes advantage of the
fact that integers have a finite number of bits. In radix sort, we iterate through each digit of the number,
grouping numbers by each digit. For example, if we have an #array of integers, we might first sort by the
first digit, so that the Os are grouped together. Then, we sort each of these groupings by the next digit. We
repeat this process sorting by each subsequent digit. until finally the whole #array is sorted.

Unlike comparison sorting #algorithms, which cannot perform better than 0 (n log (n)) in the average
case, radix sort has a runtime of O( kn), where n is the number of elements and k is the number of passes
of the sorting #algorithm.

   148     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                       Chapter 10 I Sorting and Searching

~ Searching #Algorithms

When we think of searching #algorithms, we generally think of binary search. Indeed, this is a very useful
algorithm to study.

In binary search, we look for an element x in a sorted #array by first comparing x to the midpoint of the #array.
If x is less than the midpoint, then we search the left half of the #array. If x is greater than the midpoint, then
we search the right half of the #array. We then repeat this process, treating the left and right halves as subar-
rays. Again, we compare x to the midpoint of this subarray and then search either its left or right side. We
repeat this process until we either find x or the subarray has size O.

Note that although the concept is fairly simple, getting all the details right is far more difficult than you
might think. As you study the #code below, pay attention to the plus ones and minus ones.

1 int binarySearch(int[] a, int x) {

2     int low = 8;

3     int high = a.length - 1;

4     int mid;

5

6     while (low <= high) {
         mid = (low + high) I 2;
7

8        if (a[mid] < x) {

9           low = mid + 1;

18       } else if (a[mid] > x) {

11          high = mid - 1;

12       } else {

13          return mid;

14       }

15 }

16 return -1; // Error

17 }

18

19 int binarySearchRecursive(int[] a, int x, int low, int high) {

28 if (low> high) return -1; // Error

21

22 int mid = (low + high) I 2;

23 if (a[mid] < x) {

24       return binarySearchRecursive(a, x, mid + 1, high);

25 } else if (a[mid] > x) {

26       return binarySearchRecursive(a, x, low, mid - 1);

27 } else {

28       return mid;

29    }

38 }

Potential ways to search a #data structure extend beyond binary search, and you would do best not to limit
yourself to just this option. You might, for example, search for a #node by leveraging a binary tree, or by using
a hash table. Think beyond binary search!

Interview Questions

10.1 Sorted Merge: You are given two sorted #arrays, A and B, where A has a large enough buffer at the
         end to hold B. Write a method to merge B into A in sorted order.

      Hints: #332

                                                                                    ,  q

                                         149
I Chapter 10 Sorting and Searching

10.2 Group Anagrams: Write a method to sort an #array of #strings so that all the anagrams are next to
         each other.

         Hints: #177, #182, #263, #342

                                                                                                    . )

10.3  Search in Rotated #Array: Given a sorted #array of n integers that has been rotated an unknown
      number of times, write #code to find an element in the #array. You may assume that the #array was
      originally sorted in increasing order.

      EXAMPLE

      Input:findSin{lS, 16, 19, 2a, 25, 1, 3,4,5,7, la, 14}

      Output: 8 (the index of 5 in the #array)

      Hints: #298, #310

10.4  Sorted Search, No Size: You are given an #array-like #data structure Listy which lacks a size
      method. It does, however, have an elementAt (i) method that returns the element at index i in
      0(1) time. If i is beyond the bounds of the #data structure, it returns -1. (For this reason, the #data
      structure only supports positive integers.) Given a Listy which contains sorted, positive integers,
      find the index at which an element x occurs. If x occurs multiple times, you may return any index.

      Hints: #320, #337, #348

10.5  Sparse Search: Given a sorted #array of #strings that is interspersed with empty #strings, write a
      method to find the location of a given #string.

      EXAMPLE                                      , , , , , ((car", UJJ UJJ
                                                   ((dad", teJJ
      Input: ball, {((at",                                   ((JJ  ((JJ

      ((JJ}

      Output: 4
      Hints: #256

10.6 Sort Big File: Imagine you have a 20 GB file with one #string per line. Explain how you would sort
         the file.
          Hints: #207

10.7  Missing Int: Given an input file with four billion non-negative integers, provide an #algorithm to
      generate an integer that is not contained in the file. Assume you have 1 GB of memory available for
      this task.

      FOLLOW UP
      What if you have only 10MB of memory? Assume that all the values are distinct and we now have
      no more than one billion non-negative integers.

      Hints: #235, #254, #28 1

1 SO  Cracking the Coding Intervi ew, 6th Edition
      Chapter 10 I Sorting and Searching

10.8  Find Duplicates: You have an #array with all the numbers from 1 to N, where N is at most 32,000.The
      #array may have duplicate entries and you do not know what N is. With only 4 kilobytes of memory
      available, how would you print all duplicate elements in the #array?

      Hints: #289, #315

                                                                                  " .

10.9 Sorted Matrix Search: Given an M x N matrix in which each row and each column is sorted in
          ascending order, write a method to find an element.
         Hints: # 193, #211, #229, #251, #266, #279, #288, #291, #303, #317, #330

10.10 Rank from Stream: Imagine you are reading in a stream of integers. Periodically, you wish to be able
          to look up the rank of a number x (the number of values less than or equal to x). Implement the #data
          structures and #algorithms to support these operations.That is, implement the method track (int
          x) , w hich is called when each number is generated, and the method getRankOfNumber(int
          x) , which returns the number of values less than or equal to X (not including x itself).

         EXAMPLE

         Stream(inorderofappearance):5, 1,4,4, 5, 9, 7, 13, 3

      e getRankOfNumber(l)

         getRankOfNumber(3) 1
         getRankOfNumber(4) 3
         Hints: #301, #376, #392

10.11 Peaks and Valleys: In an #array of integers, a "peak" is an element which is greater than or equal to
          the adjacent integers and a "valley" is an element which is less than or equal to the adjacent inte-
          gers. For example, in the #array {5, 8, 6, 2, 3, 4, 6}, {8, 6} are peaks and {S, 2} are valleys. Given an #array
          of integers, sort the #array into an alternating sequence of peaks and valleys.

         EXAMPLE
        Input: {S, 3, 1,2, 3}
        Output: {S, 1,3,2, 3}
         Hints: # 196, #219, #231, #253, #277, #292, #316

Additional Questions: #Arrays and #Strings (#1.2), Recursion (#8.3), Moderate (#16.10, #16.16, #16.21, #16.24),
Hard (#17.11 , #17.26).

Hints start on page 662.

      CrackingTheCodinglnterview.com [ 6th Edition  151
      11

       Testing

Before you flip past this chapter saying, "but I'm not a tester;' stop and think.Testing is an important task
      for a software engineer, and for this reason, testing questions may come up during your interview. Of
course, if you are applying for Testing roles (or Software Engineer in Test), then that's all the more reason
why you need to pay attention.

Testing problems usually fall under one of four categories: (1) Test a real world object (like a pen); (2)
Test a piece of software; (3) Write test #code for a function; (4) Troubleshoot an existing issue. We'll cover
approaches for each of these four types.

Remember that all four types require you to not make an assumption that the input or the user will play
nice. Expect abuse and plan for it.

~ What the Interviewer Is Looking For

At their surface, testing questions seem like they're just about coming up with an extensive list of test cases.
And to some extent, that's right. You do need to come up with a reasonable list of test cases.

But in addition, interviewers want to test the following:

    Big Picture Understanding: Are you a person who understands what the software is really about? Can
    you prioritize test cases properly? For example, suppose you're asked to test an e-commerce system like
    Amazon. It's great to make sure that the product images appear in the right place, but it's even more
    important that payments work reliably, products are added to the shipment queue, and customers are
    never double charged .

    Knowing How the Pieces Fit Together: Do you understand how software works, and how it might fit into
    a greater ecosystem? Suppose you're asked to test Google Spreadsheets. It's important that you test
    opening, saving, and editing documents. But, Google Spreadsheets is part of a larger ecosystem. You
    need to test integration with Gmail, with plug-ins, and with other components.

    Organization: Do you approach the problem in a structured manner, or do you just spout off anything
    that comes to your head? Some candidates, when asked to come up with test cases for a camera, will
    just state anything and everything that comes to their head. A good candidate will break down the parts
    into categories like Taking Photos, Image Management, Settings, and so on. This structured approach
    will also help you to do a more thorough job creating the test cases.

    Practicality: Can you actually create reasonable testing plans? For example, if a user reports that the
    software crashes when they open a specific image, and you just tell them to reinstall the software, that's
    typically not very practical. Your testing plans need to be feasible and realistic for a company to imple-
    ment.

1 S2  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                   Chapter 11 I Testing

Demonstrating these aspects will show that you will be a valuable member of the testing team.

~ Testing a Real World Object

Some candidates are surprised to be asked questions like how to test a pen. After all, you should be testing
software, right? Maybe, but these "real world " questions are still very common. Let's walk through this with
an example.
Question: How would you test a paperclip?

Step 1: Who will use it? And why?
You need to discuss with your interviewer who is using the product and for what purpose.The answer may
not be what you think.The answer could be "by teachers, to hold papers together;' or it could be "by artists,
to bend into the shape of animal:' Or, it could be both. The answer to this question will shape how you
handle the remaining questions.

Step 2: What are the use cases?
It will be useful for you to make a list of the use cases. In this case, the use case might be simply fastening
paper together in a non-damaging (to the paper) way.
For other questions, there might be multiple use cases. It might be, for example, that the product needs to
be able to send and receive content, or write and erase, and so on.

Step 3: What are the bounds of use?
The bounds of use might mean holding up to thirty sheets of paper in a single usage without permanent
damage (e.g., bending), and thirty to fifty sheets with minimal permanent bending.
The bounds also extend to environmental factors as well. For example, should the paperclip work during
very warm temperatures (90 - 110 degrees Fahrenheit)? What about extreme cold?

Step 4: What are the stress I failure conditions?
No product is fail-proof, so analyzing failure conditions needs to be part of your testing. A good discussion
to have with your interviewer is about when it's acceptable (or even necessary) for the product to fail, and
what failure should mean.
For example, if you were testing a laundry machine, you might decide that the machine should be able to
handle at least 30 shirts or pants. Loading 30 - 45 pieces of clothing may result in minor failure, such as the
clothing being inadequately cleaned. At more than 45 pieces of clothing, extreme failure might be accept-
able. However, extreme failure in this case should probably mean the machine never turning on the water.

It should certainly not mean a flood or a fire.

Step 5: How would you perform the testing?
In some cases, it might also be relevant to discuss the details of performing the testing. For example, if you
need to make sure a chair can withstand normal usage for five years, you probably can't actually place it in a
home and wait five years. Instead, you'd need to define what "normal" usage is (How many "sits" per year on
the seat? What about the armrest?). Then, in addition to doing some manual testing, you would likely want
a machine to automate some of the usage.

  153
Chapter 11 I Testing

~ Testing a Piece of Software

Testing a piece of software is actuall y very similar to testing a real world object. The major difference is that
software testing generally places a greater emphasis on the details of performing testing.
Note that software testing has two core aspects to it:

    Manual vs. Automated Testing: In an ideal world, we might love to automate everything, but that's rarely
    feasible. Some things are simply much better w ith manual testing because some features are too quali-
    tative for a computer to effectively examine (such as if content represents pornography). Additionally,
    whereas a computer can generally recognize only issues that it's been told to look for, human observa-
    tion may reveal new issues that haven't been specifically examined. Both humans and computers form
    an essential part of the testing process.
    Black Box Testing vs. White Box Testing: This distinction refers to the degree of access we have into the
    software. In black box testing, we're just given the software as-is and need to test it. With white box
    testing, we have additional programmatic access to test individual functions. We can also automate
    some black box testing, although it's certainly much harder.
Let's walk through an approach from start to end .

Step 1: Are we doing Black Box Testing or White Box Testing?
Though this question can often be delayed to a later step, I like to get it out of the way early on. Check with
your interviewer as to whether you 're doing black box testing or white box testing-or both .

Step 2: Who will use it? And why?
Software typically has one or more target users, and the features are designed with this in mind. For
example, if you're asked to test software for parental controls on a web browser, your target users include
both parents (who are implementing the blocking) and children (who are the recipients of blocking) . You
may also have "guests" (people who should neither be implementing nor receiving blocking).

Step 3: What are the use cases?
In the software blocking scenario, the use cases of the parents include installing the software, updating
controls, removing controls, and of course their own personal internet usage. For the children, the use cases
include accessing legal content as well as "illegal" content.
Remember that it's not up to you to just magically decide the use cases.This is a conversation to have with
your interviewer.

Step 4: What are the bounds of use?
Now that we have the vague use cases defined, we need to figure out what exactly this means. What does
it mean for a website to be blocked? Should just the "illegal " page be blocked, or the entire website? Is the
application supposed to "Iearn" what is bad content, or is it based on a white list or black list? If it's supposed
to learn what inappropriate content is, what degree of false positives or false negatives is acceptable?

Step 5: What are the stress conditions I failure conditions?
When the software fails- which it inevitably will-what should the failure look like? Clearly, the software
failure shouldn't crash the computer. Instead, it's likely that the software should just permit a blocked site,

1 S4  Crac king the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                   Chapter 11 I Testing

or ban an allowable site. In the latter case, you might want to discuss the possibility of a selective override
with a password from the parents.

Step 6: What are the test cases? How would you perform the testing?
Here is where the distinctions between manual and automated testing, and between black box and white
box testing, really come into play.
Steps 3 and 4 should have roughly defined the use cases. In step 6, we further define them and discuss
how to perform the testing. What exact situations are you testing? Which of these steps can be automated?
Which require human intervention?
Remember that while automation allows you to do some very powerful testing, it also has some significant
drawbacks. Manual testing should usually be part of your test procedures.
When you go through this list, don't just rattle off every scenario you can think of. It's disorganized, and
you're sure to miss major categories. Instead, approach this in a structured manner. Break down your testing
into the main components, and go from there. Not only will you give a more complete list of test cases, but
you'll also show that you're a structured, methodical person.

~ Testing a Function

In many ways, testing a function is the easiest type of testing. The conversation is typically briefer and less
vague, as the testing is usually limited to validating input and output.
However, don't overlook the value of some conversation with your interviewer. You should discuss any
assumptions with your interviewer, particularly with respect to how to handle specific situations.
Suppose you were asked to write #code to test sort (int [] #array), which sorts an #array of integers. You
might proceed as follows.

Step 1: Define the test cases
In general, you should think about the following types of test cases:

    The normal case: Does it generate the correct output for typical inputs? Remember to think about poten-
    tial issues here. For example, because sorting often requires some sort of partitioning, it's reasonable to
    think that the #algorithm might fail on #arrays with an odd number of elements, since they can't be evenly
    partitioned. Your test case should list both examples.
    The extremes: What happens when you pass in an empty #array? Or a very small (one element) #array? What
    if you pass in a very large one?
 #Nulls and "illegal" input: It is worthwhile to think about how the #code should behave when given illegal
    input. For example, if you're testing a function to generate the nth Fibonacci number, your test cases
    should probably include the situation where n is negative.
 Strange input: A fourth kind of input sometimes comes up: strange input. What happens when you pass
    in an already sorted #array? Or an #array that's sorted in reverse order?
Generating these tests does require knowledge of the function you are writing. If you are unclear as to the
constraints, you will need to ask your interviewer about this first.

                                                                               1SS
I Chapter 11 Testing

Step 2: Define the expected result
Often, the expected result is obvious: the right output. However, in some cases, you might want to validate
additional aspects. For instance, if the sort method returns a new sorted copy of the #array, you should
probably validate that the original #array has not been touched.

Step 3: Write test #code
Once you have the test cases and results defined, writing the #code to implement the test cases should be
fairly straightforward. Your #code might look something like:

1 void testAddThreeSorted() {
2 MyList list = new MyList();
3 list.addThreeSorted(3, 1, 2); // Adds 3 items in sorted order
4 assertEquals(list.getElement(a), 1);
5 assertEquals(list.getElement(l), 2);
6 assertEquals(list.getElement(2), 3);

7 }

~ Troubleshooting Questions

A final type of question is explaining how you would debug or troubleshoot an existing issue. Many candi-
dates balk at a question like this, giving unrealistic answers like "reinstall the software:'You can approach
these questions in a structured manner, like anything else.
Let's walk through this problem with an example: You're working on the Google Chrome team when you
receive a bug report: Chrome crashes on launch. What would you do?
Reinstalling the browser might solve this user's problem, but it wouldn't help the other users who might
be experiencing the same issue. Your goal is to understand what's really happening, so that the developers
can fix it.

Step 1: Understand the Scenario
The first thing you should do is ask questions to understand as much about the situation as possible.

    How long has the user been experiencing this issue?
 What version of the browser is it? What operating system?
 Does the issue happen consistently, or how often does it happen? When does it happen?
 Is there an error report that launches?

Step 2: Break Down the Problem
Now that you understand the details of the scenario, you want to break down the problem into testable
units. In this case, you can imagine the flow of the situation as follows:
1. Go to Windows Start menu.
2. Click on Chrome icon.
3. Browser instance starts.
4. Browser loads settings.
5. Browser issues HTTP request for homepage.

  1S6 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                          Chapter 11 I Testing

6. Browser gets HTTP response.
7. Browser parses webpage.
8. Browser displays content.
At some point in this process, something fails and it causes the browser to crash. A strong tester would
iterate through the elements of this scenario to diagnose the problem.

Step 3: Create Specific, Manageable Tests
Each of the above components should have realistic instructions-things that you can ask the user to do, or
things that you can do yourself (such as replicating steps on your own machine). In the real world, you will
be dealing with customers, and you can't give them instructions that they can't or won't do.

Interview Questions

11.1 Mistake: Find the mistake(s) in the following #code:

        unsigned int ij
        for (i = leej i >= ej --i )

            printf("%d\n", i)j

         Hints: #257, #299, #362

11.2  Random Crashes: You are given the source to an application which crashes when it is run. After
      running it ten times in a debugger, you find it never crashes in the same place. The application is
      single threaded, and uses only the C standard library. What programming errors could be causing
      this crash? How would you test each one?

      Hints: #325

                                                                                                   . ]

11.3  Chess Test: We have the following method used in a chess game: boolean eanMoveTo( int x,
      int y) .This method is part of the Pieee class and returns whether or not the piece can move to
      position (x, y). Explain how you would test this method.

      Hints: #329, #401

11.4 No Test Tools: How would you load test a webpage without using any test tools?
         Hints: #313, #345

11.5 Test a Pen: How wou ld you test a pen?
         Hints: # 140, # 164, #220

11.6 Test an ATM: How would you test an ATM in a distributed banking system?              " ,)
         Hints: #2 70, #225, #268, #349, #393

Hints start on page 662.

                                               157
                                    12

                                    CandC++

Agood interviewer won't demand that you #code in a language you don't profess to know. Hopefully,
      if you're asked to #code in C++, it's listed on your resume. If you don't remember all the APls, don't
worry-most interviewers (though not all) don't care that much. We do recommend, however, studying up
on basic C++ syntax so that you can approach these questions with ease.

~ Classes and Inheritance

Though C++ classes have similar characteristics to those of other languages, we'll review some of the syntax
below.

The #code below demonstrates the implementation of a basic class with inheritance.

1 #include <iostream>

2 using namespace stdj

3

4 #define NAME_SIZE sa // Defines a macro

5

6 class Person {

7      int idj // all members are private by default

8      char name[NAME_SIZE]j

9

1a #public :

11 void aboutMe() {

12     cout  "r am a person.j

13 }

14 };

15

16 class Student : #public Person {

17 #public:

18 void aboutMe() {

19     cout  "r am a student.j

2a }

21 };

22

23 int main() {

24 Student * p = new Student()j

25 p- >aboutMe()j // prints "r am a student.

26 delete pj // Important! Make sure to delete allocated memory.

27 return aj

28 }

   158 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                           Chapter 12 I C and c++

All #data members and methods are private by default in C++. One can modify this by introducing the
keyword #public.

~ Constructors and Destructors

The constructor of a class is automatically called upon an object's creation. If no constructor is defined, the
compiler automatically generates one called the Default Constructor. Alternatively, we can define our own
constructor.

If you just need to initialize primitive types, a simp le way to do it is this:

1 Person( i nt a) {

2     id = a;

3 }

This works for primitive types, but you might instead want to do this:

1 Person( i nt a) : id(a) {

2
3 }

The #data member id is assigned before the actual object is created and before the remainder of the
constructor #code is called.This approach is necessary when the fields are constant or class types.

The destructor cleans up upon object deletion and is automatically called when an object is destroyed. It

cannot take an argument as we don't expl icitly call a destructor.

1 ~ Person ( ) {

2     delete obj; // free any memory allocated within class

3 }

~ Virtual Functions

In an earlier example, we defined p to be of type Student:

1 Student * p = new Student();
2 p- >aboutMe() ;

What would happen if we defined p to be a Person*, like so?

1 Person * p = new Student();

2 p->aboutMe();

In this case, "I am a person"would be printed instead.This is because the function aboutMe is resolved
at compile-time, in a mechanism known as static binding.

If we want to ensure that the Student's implementation of aboutMe is called, we can define aboutMe in
the Person class to be virtual.

1 class Person {

2

3     virtu al void aboutMe() {

4        cout  "I am a person.";

5     }

6 };

7

8 class Student : #public Person {

9 #public :

10 void aboutMe() {

11       cout  "I am a student.";

12 }

                                   Cracki ngTheCodinglnterview.com 16th Edition  1 S9
Chapter 12 I Cand C++

13 };

Another usage for virtual functions is when we can't (or don't want to) implement a method for the parent
class. Imagine, for example, that we want Student and Teacher to inherit from Person so that we
can implement a common method such as addCourse(string s). Calling addCourse on Person,
however, wouldn't make much sense since the implementation depends on whether the object is actually
a Student or Teacher.

In this case, we might want addCourse to be a virtual function defined within Person, with the imple-
mentation being left to the subclass.

1 class Person {

2       int id; // all members are private by default

3 char name[NAME_SIZE];

4 #public:

5 virtual void aboutMe() {

6          cout  "I am a person .  endl;

7       }

8       virtual bool addCourse(string s) = 8;

9 };

10

11 class Student : #public Person {

12 #public:

13 void aboutMe() {

14         cout  "I am a student.  end I ;

15 }

16

17 bool addCourse(string s) {

18         cout  "Added course   s  " to student.  endl;

19         return true;

28      }

21 };

22

23 int main() {
24 Person * p = new Student();
25 p->aboutMe(); // prints "I am a student.

26 p->addCourse("History);

27 delete p;

28 }

Note that by defining add Course to be a "pure virtual function:' Person is now an abstract class and we
cannot instantiate it.

~ Virtual Destructor

The virtual function naturally introduces the concept of a "virtual destructor:' Suppose we wanted to imple-

ment a destructor method for Person and Student. Anaive #solution might look like this:

1 class Person {

2 #public:

3 -Person() {

4          cout  "Deleting a person.  endl;

5       }

6 };

7

8 class Student #public Person {

9 #public:

   160     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                        Chapter 12 I C and C++

10 -Student() {

11        cout  "Deleting a student."  endl;

12 }

13 };

14

15 int main() {

16 Person * p new Student();

17 delete Pi // prints "Deleting a person."

18 }

As in the earlier example, since p is a Person, the destructor for the Person class is called. This is problem-
atic because the memory for Student may not be cleaned up.

To fix this, we simply define the destructor for Person to be virtual.

1 class Person {

2 #public:

3      virtual -Person() {

4         cout  "Deleting a person."  endl;

5      }

6 };

7

8 class Student : #public Person {

9 #public:

10 -Student() {

11        cout  "Deleting a student."  endl;

12 }

13 };

14

15 int main() {

16 Person * p new Student();

17 delete p;

18 }

This will output the following :

    Deleting a student.
    Deleting a person.

~ Default Values

Functions can specify default values, as shown below. Note that all default parameters must be on the right

side of the function declaration, as there would be no other way to specify how the parameters line up.

1 int func(int a, int b = 3) {

2      x = a;

3 y = b;

4      return a + b;

5 }

6

7 w = func (4) ;
8 z = func(4, 5);

~ Operator Overloading

Operator overloading enables us to apply operators like + to objects that would otherwise not support
these operations. For example, if we wanted to merge two BookShelves into one, we could overload the
+ operator as follows.

                                     161
Chapter 12 I C and c++

1 BookShelf BookShelf : :operator+(BookShelf &other ) { . . . }

~ Pointers and References

A pointer holds the address of a variable and can be used to perform any operation that could be directly
done on the variable, such as accessing and modifying it.

Two pointers can equal each other, such that changing one's value also changes the other's value (since
they, in fact, point to the same address).
1 int * p new int;
2 *p = 7;
3 int * q p;

4 *p = 8;

5 cout  *q; I I prints 8
Note that the size of a pointer varies depending on the architecture: 32 bits on a 32-bit machine and 64

bits on a 64-bit machine. Pay attention to this difference, as it's common for interviewers to ask exactly how
much space a #data structure takes up.

References

A reference is another name (an alias) for a pre-existing object and it does not have memory of its own. For
example:

1 int a = 5;
2 int & b = a;

3 b = 7;
4 cout  a; I I prints 7

In line 2 above, b is a reference to a; modifying b will also modify a.

You cannot create a reference without specifying where in memory it refers to. However, you can create a
free-standing reference as shown below :

1 1* allocates memory to store 12 and makes b a referen ce to this
2 * piec e of memory. *1

3 const int & b = 12 ;

Unlike pointers, references cannot be #null and cannot be reassigned to another piece of memory.

Pointer Arithmetic

One will often see programmers perform addition on a pointer, such as what you see below:

1 int * p = new int[2] ;

2 pEa] a;

3 p[l] = 1;

4 p++ ;
5 cout  * p; I I Outputs 1
Performing p++ will skip ahead by sizeof(int) bytes, such that the #code outputs 1. Had p been of
different type, it would skip ahead as many bytes as the size of the #data structure.

'62  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                               Chapter 12 I C and C++

~ Templates

Templates are a way of reusing #code to apply the same class to different #data types. For example, we might

have a list-like #data structure which we would like to use for lists of various types. The #code below imple-

ments this with the ShiftedList class.

1 template <class T>class ShiftedList {

2 T* ar r ay;

3 int offset, size;

4 #public :

5 shiftedList(int sz) : offset(a), size(sz) {

6         ar r ay = new T[size] ;

7      }

8

9 -shiftedList() {

18        de l ete [] #array;

11     }

12

13 void s hiftBy(int n) {

14        off set = (offset + n) % size;

15 }

16

17 T get At(int i) {

18        return #array[convertlndex(i);

19 }

28

21 void setAt(T item, int i) {

22        #array[convertlndex(i) = item;

23 }

24

25 private:

26 int convertlndex(int i) {

27        i nt index = (i - offset) %size;

28        whi le (index < 8) index += size;

29        ret urn index;

3a }

31 };

Interview Questions

12.1 Last K Lines: Write a method to print the last Klines of an input file using C++.
         Hints: #449, #459

12.2 Reverse #String: Implement a function void reverse( char * str) in Cor C++ which reverses
         a #null-terminated #string.

         Hints: #410, #452

12.3 Hash Table vs. STL Map: Compare and contrast a hash table and an STL map. How is a hash table
         implemented? If the number of inputs is small, which #data structure options can be used instead of
         a hash table?

         Hints: #423

                                              163
Chapter 12 I C and c++

12.4 Virtual Functions: How do virtual functions work in (++?
         Hints: #463

12.5 Shallow vs. Deep Copy: What is the difference between deep copy and shallow copy? Explain how
          you would use each.

         Hints: #445

12.6 Volatile: What is the significance of the keyword "volatile" in C?
         Hints: #456

12.7 Virtual Base Class: Why does a destructor in base class need to be declared virtual?
         Hints: #421, #460

12.8  Copy #Node: Write a method that takes a pointer to a #Node structure as a parameter and returns a
      complete copy of the passed in #data structure. The #Node #data structure contains two pointers to
      other #Nodes.

      Hints: #427, #462

12.9  Smart Pointer: Write a smart pointer class. A smart pointer is a #data type, usually implemented with
      templates, that simulates a pointer while also providing automatic garbage collection. It automati-

      cally counts the number of references to a SmartPointer<T* >object and frees the object of type

      T when the reference count hits zero.

      Hints: #402, #438, #453

                                                                                                       '.

12.10 Malloc: Write an aligned malloc and free function that supports allocating memory such that the
          memory address returned is divisible by a specific power of two.
         EXAMPLE

        align_malloc (Hlee ,128) will return a memory address that is a multiple of 128 and that points

         to memory of size 1000 bytes.
         aligned_free () will free memory allocated byalign_maUoe.
         Hints: #413, #432, #440

12.11 20 Alloc: Write a function in ( called my2DAlloe which allocates a two-dimensional #array. Mini-
          mize the number of calls to maUoe and make sure that the memory is accessible by the notation

        arr[i] [j].

         Hints: #406, #418, #426

Additional Questions: Linked Lists (#2.6), Testing (#11 .1), Java (#13.4), Threads and Locks (#15.3).
Hints start on page 676.

164   Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                 13

                                 Java

W hile Java-related questions are found throughout this book, this chapter deals with questions about
        the language and syntax. Such questions are more unusual at bigger companies, which believe more
in testing a candidate's aptitude than a candidate's knowledge (and which have the time and resources
to train a candidate in a particular language). However, at other companies, these pesky questions can be
quite common.

~ How to Approach

As these questions focus so much on knowledge, it may seem silly to talk about an approach to these prob-
lems. After all, isn't it just about knowing the right answer?

Yes and no. Of course, the best thing you can do to master these questions is to learn Java inside and out.
But, if you do get stumped, you can try to tackle it with the following approach:

1. Create an example of the scenario, and ask yourself how things should play out.
2. Ask yourself how other languages would handle this scenario.
3. Consider how you would design this situation if you were the language designer. What would the impli-

    cations of each choice be?

Your interviewer may be equally- or more- impressed if you can derive the answer than if you automati-
cally knew it. Don't try to bluff though. Tell the interviewer, "I'm not sure I can recall the answer, but let me
see if I can figure it out. Suppose we have this #code .. ."

~ Overloading vs. Overriding

Overloading is a term used to describe when two methods have the same name but differ in the type or
number of arguments.

1 #public double computeArea(Circle c) {  .  }
2 #public double computeArea(Square s) { ... }

Overriding, however, occurs when a method shares the same name and function signature as another
method in its super class.

1 #public abstract class Shape {

2    #public void printMe() {

3       System.out.println("I am a shape.);

4    }

5    #public abstract double computeArea()j

6 }

                                              165
I Chapter 13 Java

7

8 #public class Circle extends Shape {

9 private double rad = 5;

10 #public void printMe() {

11      System.out.println("I am a circle. n );

12 }

13

14 #public double computeArea() {

15      return rad * rad * 3.15;

16 }

17 }

18

19 #public class Ambiguous extends Shape {

20 private double area = 10;

21 #public double computeArea() {

22      return area;

23 }

24 }

25

26 #public class IntroductionOverriding {

27 #public static void main(String[] args) {

28      Shape[] shapes = new Shape[2];

29      Circle circle = new Circle();

30      Ambiguous ambiguous = new Ambiguous();

31

32      shapes[a] circle;

33      shapes[l] ambiguous;

34

35      for (Shape s : shapes) {

36         s.printMe();

37         System.out.println(s.computeArea(;

38      }

39 }

40 }

The above #code will print:

1 I am a circle.

2 78.75

3 I am a shape.
4 1a.0

Observe that Circle overrode printMe (), whereas Ambiguous just left this method as-is.

~ Collection Framework

Java's collection framework is incredibly useful, and you will see it used throughout this book. Here are
some of the most useful items:

ArrayList: An #ArrayList is a dynamically resizing #array, which grows as you insert elements.

1 #ArrayList <String> myArr = new #ArrayList<String >();

2 myArr . add ("onen ) ;
3 myArr.add("twon );
4 System.out.println(myArr.get(a; / * prints <one> */

Vector: A vector is very similar to an #ArrayList, except that it is synchronized. Its syntax is almost
identical as well.

   166  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                     Chapter 13 I Java

1 vector<String> myVect new vector<String>();
2 myVect.add("one");
3 myVect.add("two");
4 System.out.println(myVect.get(e;

LinkedList: LinkedList is, of course, Java's built-in LinkedList class. Though it rarely comes up in
an interview, it's useful to study because it demonstrates some of the syntax for an iterator.

1 LinkedList<String> myLinkedList = new LinkedList<String>();

2 myLinkedList . add ("two") ;
3 myLinkedList. addFirst("one");

4 Iterator<String> iter = myLinkedList.iterator();

5 while (iter.hasNext( {
6 System.out.println(iter.next(;
7 }

HashMap:The HashMap collection is widely used, both in interviews and in the real world. We've provided
a snippet of the syntax below.

1 HashMap<String, #String> map = new HashMap<String, #String>();

2 map.put("one", "uno");
3 map.put("two", "dos");
4 System. out. println(map. get ("one";

Before your interview, make sure you're very comfortable with the above syntax. You'll need it.

Interview Questions

Please note that because virtually all the #solutions in this book are implemented with Java, we have selected
only a small number of questions for this chapter. Moreover, most of these questions deal with the "trivia" of
the languages, since the rest of the book is filled with Java programming questions.

13.1 Private Constructor: In terms of inheritance, what is the effect of keeping a constructor private?
         Hints: #404

13.2 Return from Finally: In Java, does the finally block get executed if we insert a return state-
         ment inside the try block of a try-catch-finally?

Hints: #409

                                                                                 t qt1)

13.3 Final, etc.: What is the difference between final , finally, and finalize?
         Hints: #4 12

                                                                                 P U1

13.4 Generics vs. Templates: Explain the difference between templates in C++ and generics in Java.
         Hints: #4 16, #425

13.S TreeMap, HashMap, LinkedHashMap: Explain the differences between TreeMap, HashMap, and
         LinkedHashMap. Provide an example of when each one would be best.

         Hints: #420, #424, #430, #454

                                      167
Chapter 13 I Java

13.6 Object Reflection: Explain what object reflection is in Java and why it is useful.
         Hints: #435

13.7 Lambda Expressions: There is a class Country that has methods getContinentO and
         getPopulationO. Write a function int get Population (List<Country> countries,
         #String continent) that computes the total population of a given continent, given a list of all
         countries and the name of a continent.
         Hints: #448, #461, #464

13.8 Lambda Random: Using Lambda expressions, write a function List<Integer>
         getRandomSubset (List< Integer> list) that returns a random subset of arbitrary size. All
         subsets (including the empty set) should be equally likely to be chosen.
         Hints: #443, #450, #457

Additional Questions: #Arrays and #Strings (#1.3), Object-Oriented Design (#7.12), Threads and Locks (#15.3)
Hints start on page 676.

168  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                             14

                             #Databases

If you profess knowledge of #databases, you might be asked some questions on it. We'll review some of the
  key concepts and offer an overview of how to approach these problems. As you read these queries, don't
be surprised by minor variations in syntax. There are a variety of flavors of SOL, and you might have worked
with a slightly different one. The examples in this book have been tested against Microsoft SOL Server.

~ SQL Syntax and Variations

Implicit and explicit joins are shown below. These two statements are equivalent, and it's a matter of
personal preference which one you choose. For consistency, we will stick to the explicit join.

Explicit Join                                Implicit Join

1 SELECT CourseName, TeacherName             1 SELECT CourseName, TeacherName
2 FROM Courses INNER JOIN Teachers
                                             2 FROM Courses, Teachers
3 ON Courses.TeacherID = Teachers.TeacherID
                                             3 WHERE Courses.TeacherID =

                                             4              Teachers.TeacherID

~ Denormalized vs. Normalized #Databases

Normalized #databases are designed to minimize redundancy, while denormalized #databases are designed
to optimize read time.

In a traditional normalized #database with #data like Courses and Teachers, Courses might contain a
column called TeacherID, which is a foreign key to Teacher. One benefit of this is that information about
the teacher (name, address, etc.) is only stored once in the #database. The drawback is that many common
queries will require expensive joins.

Instead, we can denormalize the #database by storing redundant #data. For example, if we knew that we
would have to repeat this query often, we might store the teacher's name in the Courses table. Denormal-
ization is commonly used to create highly scalable systems.

~ SQL Statements

Let's walk through a review of basic SOL syntax, using as an example the #database that was mentioned
earlier. This #database has the following simple structure (* indicates a primary key):

      Courses: CourseID*, CourseName, TeacherID
      Teachers: TeacherID*, TeacherName
      Students: StudentID*, StudentName

                                     169
Chapter 14 I #Databases

      StudentCourses: CourseID * , StudentID*
Using the above table, implement the following queries.

Query 1: Student Enrollment

Implement a query to get a list of all students and how many courses each student is enrolled in.

At first, we might try something like this:

1 / * Incorrect #Code */
2 SELECT Students.St udentName, count( * )
3 FROM Students I NNER JOIN St udentCourses
4 ON Students.StudentID = StudentCourses.StudentID

5 GROUP BY Students.StudentID

This has three problems:

1. We have excluded students who are not enrolled in any courses, since StudentCourses only includes
    enrolled students. We need to change this to a LEFT JOIN.

2. Even if we changed it to a LEFT JOIN, the query is still not quite right. Doing count ( * ) would return

    how many items there are in a given group of Student IDs. Students enrolled in zero courses would still
    have one item in their group.We need to change this to count the number of CourseIDs in each group:
    count(StudentCourses . CourseID) .

3. We've grouped by Students. StudentID, but there are still multiple StudentNames in each group.
    How will the #database know which StudentName to return? Sure, they may all have the same value,
   but the #database doesn't understand that. We need to apply an aggregate function to this, such as
    first(Students.StudentName).

Fixing these issues gets us to this query:

1 / * #Solution 1: Wrap with another query * /

2 SELECT StudentName, Stud ents.StudentID, Cnt

3 FROM (

4  SELECT Students.StudentID, count(StudentCourses.CourseID) as [Cnt]

5  FROM Students LEFT JOIN StudentCourses

6  ON Students.StudentID = StudentCourses.StudentID

7  GROUP BY Students . StudentID

8  T INNER JOIN Students on T.studentID = Students.StudentID

Looking at this #code, one might ask why we don't just select the student name on line 3 to avoid having to
wrap lines 3 through 6 with another query. This (incorrect) #solution is shown below.

1 / * Incorrect #Code */
1 SELECT StudentName, Student s .StudentID, count(StudentCourses.CourseID) as [Cnt]
2 FROM Students LEFT JOIN StudentCourses
3 ON Students . StudentID = StudentCourses.StudentID
4 GROUP BY Students.StudentID

The answer is that we can't do that - at least not exactly as shown . We can only select values that are in an
aggregate function or in the GROUP BY clause.

Alternatively, we could resolve the above issues with either of the following statements:

1 /* #Solution 2: Add StudentName to GROUP BY clause. * /

2 SELECT StudentName, Students.StudentID, count(StudentCourses.CourseID) as [Cnt]
3 FROM Students LEFT JOIN StudentCourses
4 ON Students.StudentID = StudentCourses.StudentID

5 GROUP BY Students . StudentID, Students.StudentName

OR

   170 Cracking the Coding Intervi ew, 6th Edition
                                                            Chapter 14 I #Databases

1 /* #Solution 3: Wrap with aggregate function. */

2 SELECT max(StudentName) as [StudentName], Students.StudentID,

3  count(StudentCourses.CourseID) as [Count]

4 FROM Students LEFT JOIN StudentCourses

5 ON Students.StudentID = StudentCourses.StudentID

6 GROUP BY Students.StudentID

Query 2: Teacher Class Size

Implement a query to get a list of all teachers and how many students they each teach. If a teacher teaches
the same student in two courses, you should double count the student. Sort the list in descending order of
the number of students a teacher teaches.

We can const ruct this query step by step. First, let's get a list of TeacherIDs and how many students are
associated with each TeacherID. This is very similar to the earlier query.

1 SELECT TeacherID, count(StudentCourses.CourseID) AS [Number]
2 FROM Courses INNER JOIN StudentCourses
3 ON Courses.CourseID = StudentCourses.CourseID
4 GROUP BY Courses.TeacherID

Note that this INNER JOIN will not select teachers who aren't teaching classes. We'll handle that in the

below query when we join it with the list of all teachers.

1 SELECT TeacherName, isnull(StudentSize.Number, a)

2 FROM Teachers LEFT JOIN

3  (SELECT TeacherID, count(StudentCourses.CourseID) AS [Number]

4  FROM Courses INNER JOIN StudentCourses

5  ON Courses.CourseID = StudentCourses.CourseID

6  GROUP BY Courses.TeacherID) StudentSize

7 ON Teachers . TeacherID = StudentSize.TeacherID

8 ORDER BY StudentSize.Number DESC

Note how we handled the NULL values in the SE LECT statement to convert the NULL values to zeros.

~ Small #Database Design

Additionally, you might be asked to design your own #database. We'll walk you through an approach for
this.You might notice the similarities between this approach and the approach for object-oriented design.

Step 1: Handle Ambiguity
Database questions often have some ambiguity, intentionally or unintentionally. Before you proceed with
your design, you must understand exactly what you need to design.
Imagine you are asked to design a system to represent an apartment rental agency. You will need to know
whether this agency has multiple locations or just one. You should also discuss with your interviewer how
general you should be. For example, it would be extremely rare for a person to rent two apartments in the
same building. But does that mean you shouldn't be able to handle that? Maybe, maybe not. Some very rare
conditions might be best handled through a work around (like duplicating the person's contact information
in the #database).

Step 2: Define the Core Objects
Next, we should look at the core objects of our system. Each of these core objects typically translates into a
table. In this case, our core objects might be Property, Building, Apartment, Tenant and Manager.

                                           171
Chapter 14 I #Databases

Step 3: Analyze Relationships

Outlin ing the core objects should give us a good sense of what the tables should be. How do these tables
relate to each other? Are they many-to-many? One-to-many?

If Buildings hasa one-to-many relationship with Apartments (one Building has many Apartments),
then we might represent this as follows:

Apartments              int                     Buildings        int
ApartmentID             varchar(100)            BuildingID       varcha r (100)
ApartmentAddress        int                     BuildingName     varcha r (S00 )
BuildingID                                      BuildingAddress

Note that the Apartments table links back to Buildings with a BuildingID column.

If we want to allow for the possibility that one person rents more than one apartment, we might want to
implement a many-to-many relationship as follows:

TenantApartments  Apartments                    int            Tenants            int
TenantID lint     ApartmentID                   varchar( 500)  TenantID           varchar(100)
ApartmentID lint  ApartmentAddress              int            TenantName         va r char(S00)
                  BuildingID                                   TenantAddre s s

The TenantApartments table stores a relationship between Tenants and Apartments .

Step 4: Investigate Actions

Finally, we fill in the details. Walk through the common actions that will be taken and understand how to
store and retrieve the relevant #data. We'll need to handle lease terms, moving out, rent payments, etc. Each
of these actions requires new tables and columns.

~ Large #Database Design

When designing a large, scalable #database, joins (which are req uired in the above examples) are generally
very slow.Thus, you must denormalize your #data.Think carefully about how #data will be used-you'll prob-
ably need to duplicate the #data in multiple tables.

Interview Questions

Questions 1 through 3 refer to the #database schema at the end of the chapter. Each apartment can have
multiple tenants, and each tenant can have multiple apartments. Each apartment belongs to one building,
and each building belongs to one complex.

14.1 Multiple Apartments: Write a SQL query to get a list of tenants who are renting more than one
          apartment.
          Hints: #40B

172 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                        Chapter 14 I #Databases

14.2 Open Requests: Write a SQL query to get a list of all buildings and the number of open requests
          (Requests in which status equals 'Open' ).

          Hints:#411

14.3 Close All Requests: Building #11 is undergoing a major renovation . Implement a query to close all
          requests from apartments in this building.

         Hints: #431

14.4 Joins: What are the different types of joins? Please explain how t hey differ and why certain types
          are better in certain situations.

         Hints: #451

14.5 Denormalization: What is denormalization? Explain the pros and cons.
         Hints: #444, #455

14.6 Entity-Relationship Diagram: Draw an entity-relationship diagram for a #database with companies.
          people, and professionals (people who work for companies).

         Hints: #436

14.7  Design Grade #Database: Imagine a simple #database storing information for students' grades.
      Design what this #database might look like and provide a SQL query to return a list of the honor roll
      students (top 10%), sorted by their grade point average.

      Hints: #428, #442

Additional Questions: Object-Oriented Design (#7.7), System Design and Scalability (#9.6)
Hints start on page 676.

Apartments                  Buildings                   Requests
AptID                                                   RequestID
UnitNumber  int             BuildingID int              Status                             int
BuildingID  varchar(18)                                 AptID                              varchar(188)
            int             ComplexID int               Description                        int
                                                                                           varchar(S88)
                            BuildingName varchar (188)

                            Address     varchar(S88)

Complexes                   AptTenants                  Tenants

ComplexID lint              TenantID l int              TenantID lint

I ComplexName varchar(188)  AptID       j int           I TenantName varchar(188)

                                        CrackingTheCodinglnterview.com [6th Edition 173
                             15

                            Threads and Locks

Ina Microsoft, Google or Amazon interview, it's not terribly common to be asked to implement an algo-
  rithm with threads (unless you're working in a team for which this is a particularly important skill). It
is, however, relatively common for interviewers at any company to assess your general understanding of
threads, particularly your understanding of deadlocks.

This chapter will provide an introduction to this topic.

~ Threads in Java

Every thread in Java is created and controlled by a unique object ofthe java .lang. Thread class. When
a standalone application is run, a user thread is automatically created to execute the rna in ( ) method. This
thread is called the main thread.
In Java, we can implement threads in one of two ways:
 By implementing the java .lang. Runnable interface

    By extending the java.lang. Thread class
We will cover both of these below.

Implementing the Runnable Interface

The Runnable interface has the following very simple structure.

1 #public interface Runnable {

2    void run () ;

3 }

To create and use a thread using this interface, we do the following:

, . Create a class which implements the Runnable interface. An object of this class is a Runnable object.

2. Create an object of type Thread by passing a Runnable object as argumentto the Thread constructor.
    The Thread object now has a Runnable object that implements the run() method.

3. The st art ( ) method is invoked on the Th read object created in the previous step.

For example:

1 #public class RunnableThreadExample implements Runnable {

2    #public int count = 0;

3

4    #public void run() {

5    System.out.println("RunnableThread starting. D );

   174 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                  I Chapter 15 Threads and Locks

6     try {

7        while (count < S) {

8            Thread.sleep(S66);

9            count++;

16       }

11    } catch (InterruptedException exc) {

12       System.out.println("RunnableThread interrupted.");

13    }

14    System.out.println("RunnableThread terminating.");

15 }

16 }

17

18 #public static void main(String[] args) {

19 RunnableThreadExample instance = new RunnableThreadExample();

26 Thread thread = new Thread(instance);
21 thread.start();
22

23 /* waits until above thread counts to S (slowly) */

24 while (instance. count != S) {

25    try {

26       Thread.sleep(2S6);

27    } catch (InterruptedException exc) {

28       exc.printStackTrace();

29    }

36 }

31 }

In the above #code, observe that all we really needed to do is have our class implement the run () method
(line 4). Another method can then pass an instance of the class to new Thread (obj) (lines 19 - 20) and
call start() on the thread (Iine21).

Extending the Thread Class

Alternatively, we can create a thread by extending the Thread class. This will almost always mean that
we override the run () method, and the subclass may also call the thread constructor explicitly in its
constructor.

The below #code provides an example of this.

1 #public class ThreadExample extends Thread {

2 int count = 6;

3

4 #public void run() {

5     System. out. println("Thread starting.");

6     try {

7        while (count < S) {

8            Thread.sleep(S66);

9            System.out.println("In Thread, count is " + count);

16           count++;

11       }

12    } catch (InterruptedException exc) {

13       System.out.println("Thread interrupted.");

14    }

15    System.out.println("Thread terminating.");

16 }

17 }

18

                                               175
Chapter 15 I Threads and Locks

19 #public class ExampleS {

20 #public static void main(String args[]) {

21       ThreadExample instance = new ThreadExample();

22       instance.start();

23

24       while (instance. count != 5) {

25          try {

26             Thread.sleep(250);

27          } catch (Interrupted Exception exc) {

28             exc.printStackTrace();

29          }

30       }

31 }

32 }

This #code is very similar to the first approach. The difference is that since we are extending the Thread
class, rather than just implementing an interface, we can call sta r t () on the instance of the class itself.

Extending the Thread Class vs.lmplementing the Runnable Interface

When creating threads, there are two reasons why implementing the Runnable interface may be prefer-
able to extending the Thread class:

    Java does not support multiple inheritance. Therefore, extending the Thread class means that the
    subclass cannot extend any other class. A class implementing the Runnable interface will be able to
    extend another class.

    A class might only be interested in being runnable, and therefore, inheriting the full overhead of the
    Thread class would be excessive.

~ Synchronization and Locks

Threads within a given process share the same memory space, which is both a positive and a negative. It
enables threads to share #data, which can be valuable. However, it also creates the opportunity for issues
when two threads modify a resource at the same time. Java provides synchronization in order to control
access to shared resources.

The keyword synchronized and the lock form the basis for implementing synchronized execution of
code.

Synchronized Methods

Most commonly, we restrict access to shared resources through the use of the 5 yn c hron ized keyword. It
can be applied to methods and #code blocks, and restricts multiple threads from executing the #code simul-
taneously on the same object.

To clarify the last point, consider the following #code:

1 #public class MyClass extends Thread {

2     private #String name;

3     private MyObject myObj;

4

5     #public MyClass(MyObject obj, #String n) {

6        name = n;

7        myObj = obj;

8     }

   176 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                           Chapter 15 I Threads and Locks

9

10 #public void run() {

11       myObj.foo(name);

12 }

13 }

14

15 #public class MyObject {

16 #public synchronized void foo(String name) {

17       try {

18          System. out. println("Thread " + name + ". fooO: starting");

19          Thread.sleep(3000);

20          System.out.println("Thread " + name + ".fooO: ending");

21       } catch (InterruptedException exc) {

22          System. out. println("Thread " + name + ": interrupted.");

23       }

24 }

25 }

Can two instances of MyClass call foo at the same time? It depends. If they have the same instance of
MyObj ect, then no. But, if they hold different references, then the answer is yes.

1 /* Difference references - both threads can call MyObject.foo() */
2 MyObject objl = new MyObject();

3 MyObject obj2 = new MyObject();

4 MyClass threadl = new MyClass (obj 1, "1");

5 MyClass thread2 = new MyClass(obj2, "2");

6 threadl.start();

7 thread2.start()

8

9 /* Same reference to obj. Only one will be allowed to call foo,

10 * and the other will be forced to wait. */

11 MyObject obj = new MyObject();

12 MyClass threadl = new MyClass(obj, "I");

13 MyClass thread2 = new MyClass(obj, "2");

14 threadl.start()

15 thread2.start()

Static methods synchronize on the class lock. The two threads above could not simultaneously execute
synchronized static methods on the same class, even if one is calling foo and the other is calling bar.

1 #public class MyClass extends Thread {

2

3 #public void run() {

4        if (name.equals("I" MyObject.foo(name);

5        else if (name.equals("2" MyObject.bar(name);

6     }

7 }

8

9 #public class MyObject {

10 #public static synchronized void foo(String name) { /* same as before */ }

11 #public static synchronized void bar (String name) { /* same as foo */ }

12 }

If you run this #code, you will see the following printed:

    Thread l.foo(): starting
    Thread l.foo(): ending
    Thread 2.bar(): starting
    Thread 2.bar(): ending

                                           177
Chapter 15 I Threads and Locks

Synchronized Blocks

Similarly, a block of #code can be synchronized. This operates very similarly to synchronizing a method.

1 #public class MyClass extends Thread {

2

3      #public void run() {

4         myObj.foo(name);

5      }

6 }

7 #public class MyObject {

8      #public void foo(String name) {

9         synchronized(this) {

Ie

11        }

12 }

13 }

Like synchronizing a method, only one thread per instance of MyObj ect can execute the #code within the
synchronized block. That means that, if threadl and thread2 have the same instance of MyObj ect,

only one will be allowed to execute the #code block at a time.

Locks

For more granular control, we can utilize a lock. A lock (or monitor) is used to synchronize access to a
shared resource by associating the resource with the lock. Athread gets access to a shared resource by first
acquiring the lock associated with the resource. At any given time, at most one thread can hold the lock
and, therefore, only one thread can access the shared resource.

A common use case for locks is when a resource is accessed from multiple places, but should be only
accessed by one thread at a time. This case is demonstrated in the #code below.

1 #public class LockedATM {

2      private Lock lock;

3      private int balance = lee;

4

5      #public LockedATM() {

6         lock = new ReentrantLock();

7      }

8

9      #public int withdraw(int value) {

Ie        lock .1ockO;

11        int temp = balance;

12        try {

13           Thread.sleep(lee);

14           temp = temp - value;

15           Thread.sleep(lee);

16           balance = temp;

17        } catch (InterruptedException e) {       }

18        lock.unlock();

19        return temp;

213 }

21

22 #public int deposit(int value) {

23        lock.lockO;

24        int temp = balance;

25        try {

26           Thread.sleep(lee);

   178 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                              Chapter 15 I Threads and Locks

27    temp = temp + value;

28    Thread.sleep(300);

29    balance = temp;

30    } catch (Interrupted Exception e) {  }

31    lock.unlock();

32    return temp;

33 }

34 }

Of course, we've added #code to intentionally slow down the execution of withdraw and deposit, as it
helps to illustrate the potential problems that can occur. You may not write #code exactly like this, but the
situation it mirrors is very, very real. Using a lock will help protect a shared resource from being modified in
unexpected ways.

~ Deadlocks and Deadlock Prevention

A deadlock is a situation where a thread is waiting for an object lock that another thread holds, and this
second threa d is waiting for an object lock that the first thread holds (or an equivalent situation with several
threads) . Since each thread is waiting for the other thread to relinquish a lock, they both remain waiting
forever.The threads are said to be deadlocked.

In order for a deadlock to occur, you must have all four of the following conditions met:

7. Mutual Exclusion: Only one process can access a resource at a given time. (Or, more accurately, there is
    limited access to a resource. A deadlock could also occur if a resource has limited quantity.)

2. Hold and Wait: Processes already holding a resource can request additional resources, without relin-
    quishing their current resources.

3. No Preemption : One process cannot forcib ly remove another process' resource.

4. Circular Wait: Two or more processes form a circular chain where each process is waiting on another
    resource in the chain.

Deadlock prevention entails removing any of the above conditions, but it gets tricky because many of these
conditions are difficult to satisfy. For instance, removing #1 is difficult because many resources can only
be used by one process at a time (e.g., printers). Most deadlock prevention #algorithms focus on avoiding
cond ition #4: circular wait.

Interview Questions

1S.l Thread vs. Process: What's the difference between a thread and a process?          )J 4
         Hints: #405
                                                                                        r s~ {I
1S.2 Context Switch: How would you measure the time spent in a context switch?
         Hints: #403, #407, #415, #441

                                             179
Chapter 15 I Threads and Locks

15.3  Dining Philosophers: In the famous dining philosophers problem, a bunch of philosophers are
      sitting around a circular table with one chopstick between each of them. A philosopher needs
      both chopsticks to eat. and always picks up the left chopstick before the right one. A deadlock
      could potentially occur if all the philosophers reached for the left chopstick at the same time. Using
      threads and locks, implement a simulation of the dining philosophers problem that prevents dead-
      locks.

      Hints: #419, #437

15.4 Deadlock-Free Class: Design a class which provides a lock only if there are no possible deadlocks.
         Hints: #422, #434

15.5 Call In Order: Suppose we have the following #code:

          #public class Foo {
              #public FOO() {  }
              #public void first() {  }
              #public void second() {  }
              #public void third() { .  }

          }
         The same instance of Foo will be passed to three different threads. ThreadA will call first,
         threadB will call second, and threadC will call third . Design a mechanism to ensure that
         first is called before second and second is called before third .

         Hints: #417, #433, #446

15.6  Synchronized Methods: You are given a class with synchronized method A and a normal method
      B. lf you have two threads in one instance of a program, can they both execute A at the same time?
      Can they execute A and B at the same time?

      Hints: #429

15.7  FizzBuzz: In the classic problem FizzBuzz, you are told to print the numbers from 1 to n. However,
      when the number is divisible by 3, print "Fizz': When it is divisible by 5, print "Buzz': When it is divis-
      ible by 3 and 5, print "FizzBuzz': In this problem, you are asked to do this in a multithreaded way.
      Implement a multithreaded version of FizzBuzz with four threads. One thread checks for divisibility
      of 3 and prints "Fizz': Another thread is responsible for divisibility of 5 and prints "Buzz': A third thread
      is responsible for divisibility of 3 and 5 and prints "FizzBuzz". A fourth thread does the numbers.

      Hints: #414, #439, #447, #458

Hints start on page 676.

180   Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
         16

                                       Moderate

16.1 Number Swapper: Write a function to swap a number in place (that is, without temporary vari-
         ables) .
         Hints: #492, #716, #737

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I I .),'

16.2 Word Frequencies: Design a method to find the frequency of occurrences of any given word in a
          book. What if we were running this #algorithm multiple times?
         Hints: #489, #536

16.3 Intersection: Given two straight line segments (represented as a start point and an end point),
          compute the point of intersection, if any.
         Hints: #465, #472, #497, #517, #527

16.4 Tic Tac Win: Design an #algorithm to figure out if someone has won a game of tic-tac-toe.
         Hints: #710, #732

16.5 Factorial Zeros: Write an #algorithm which computes the number of trailing zeros in n factorial.
         Hints: #585, #711, #729, #733, #745

16.6 Smallest Difference: Given two #arrays of integers, compute the pair of values (one value in each
          #array) with the smallest (non-negative) difference. Return the difference.
         EXAMPLE
         Input: {1, 3, 15, 11, 2}, {23, 127, 235, 19, 8}
         Output: 3. That is, the pair (11 , 8).
         Hints: #632, #670, #679

16.7 Number Max: Write a method that finds the maximum of two numbers. You should not use if-else
          or any other comparison operator.
         Hints: #473, #513, #707, #728

  181
Chapter 16 I Moderate

16.8 English Int: Given any integer, print an English phrase that describes the integer (e.g., "One Thou-
          sand, Two Hundred Thirty Four").

         Hints: #502, #588, #688

16.9 Operations: Write methods to implement the multiply, subtract, and divide operations for integers.
         The results of all of these are integers. Use only the add operator.
         Hints: #572, #600, #613, #648

16.10 Living People: Given a list of people with their birth and death years, implement a method to
          compute the year with the most number of people alive. You may assume that all people were born
          between 1900 and 2000 (inclusive). If a person was alive during any portion of that year, they should

       be included in that year's count. For example, Person (birth = 1908, death =1909) is included in the

          counts for both 1908 and 1909.

         Hints: #476, #490, #507, #514, #523, #532, #541, #549, #576

16.11 Diving Board: You are building a diving board by placing a bunch of planks of wood end-to-end.
         There are two types of planks, one of length shorter and one of length longer. You must use
          exactly K planks of wood. Write a method to generate all possible lengths for the diving board.

         Hints: #690, #700, #715, #722, #740, #747

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I I

16.12 XML Encoding: Since XML is very verbose, you are given a way of encoding it where each tag gets

          mapped to a pre-defined integer value. The language/grammar is as follows:

Element --> Tag Attributes END Children END

Attribute --> Tag Value

END          --> e

Tag          --> some predefined mapping to int
Value        --> #string value

For example, the following XML might be converted into the compressed #string below (assuming a
mapping of family - > 1, person - >2, firstName - > 3, lastName - > 4, state
- > 5).

<family lastName="McDowell" state="CA">
    <person firstName="Gayle">Some Message</person>

</family>

Becomes:

1 4 McDowell 5 CA e 2 3 Gayle e Some Message e e

Write #code to print the encoded version of an XML element (passed in Element and Attribute

objects) .

Hints: #466                                          .., ~ ~

16.13 Bisect Squares: Given two squares on a two-dimensional plane, find a line that would cut these two
          squares in half. Assume that the top and the bottom sides of the square run parallel to the x-axis.

         Hints: #468, #479, #528, #560

182 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                 Chapter 16 I Moderate

16.14 Best Line: Given a two-dimensional graph with points on it, find a line which passes the most
          number of points.
         Hints: #491, #520, #529, #563

16.15 Master Mind: The Game of Master Mind is played as follows:
         The computer has four slots, and each slot will contain a ball that is red (R), yellow (V), green (G) or
         blue (B). For example, the computer might have RGGB (Slot #1 is red, Slots #2 and #3 are green, Slot
         #4 is blue).
         You, the user, are trying to guess the #solution. You might, for example, guess YRGB.
         When you guess the correct color for the correct slot, you get a "hit:' If you guess a color that exists
         but is in the wrong slot, you get a "pseudo-hit:' Note that a slot that is a hit can never count as a
         pseudo-hit.
         For exam ple, if the actual #solution is RGBY and you guess GGRR, you have one hit and one pseudo-hit.
         Write a method that, given a guess and a #solution, returns the number of hits and pseudo-hits.
         Hints: #639, #730

16.16 Sub Sort: Given an #array of integers, write a method to find indices mand n such that if you sorted
         elements mthrough n, the entire #array would be sorted. Minimize n - m(that is, find the smallest
          such sequence).
        EXAMPLE
         Input 1, 2, 4, 7, la, 11, 7, 12, 6, 7, 16, 18, 19
        Output: (3, 9)
         Hints: #482, #553, #667, #708, #735, #746

                                                                                                                                                                        1 j,

16.17 Contiguous Sequence: You are given an #array of integers (both positive and negative) . Find the
          conti guous sequence with the largest sum. Return the sum.
        EXAMPLE
        Input 2, -8, 3, -2, 4, -10

        Output S (Le., {3, -2, 4})

         Hints: #531, #551, #567, #594, #614

16.18 Pattern Matching:You are given two #strings, pattern and value.The pattern #string consists of
          just the letters a and b, describing a pattern within a #string. For example, the #string catcatgocatgo
          matches the pattern aabab (where cat is a and go is b). It also matches patterns like a, ab, and b.
          Write a method to determine if value matches pattern .
         Hints: #631, #643, #653, #663, #685, #718, #727

  183
Chapter 16 I Moderate

16.19 Pond Sizes: You have an integer matrix representing a plot of land, where the value at that loca-
          tion represents the height above sea level. A value of zero indicates water. A pond is a region of
          water connected vertically, horizontally, or diagonally. The size of the pond is the total number of
          connected water cells. Write a method to compute the sizes of all ponds in the matrix.

        EXAMPLE

         Input:

          a 2 1 a
         a1 a1
          1 1a1
          a1 a1

         Output: 2, 4, 1 (in any order)

         Hints: #674, #687, #706, #723

16.20 T9: On old cell phones, users typed on a numeric keypad and the phone would provide a list of
          words that matched these numbers. Each digit mapped to a set of 0 - 4 letters. Implement an algo-
          rithm to return a list of matching words, given a sequence of digits. You are provided a list of valid
          words (provided in whatever #data structure you'd like). The mapping is shown in the diagram below:

                                                1  2    3

                                                   abc  def

                                                4  5    6

                         ghi                       jkl  mno

                                                7  8    9

                         pqrs                      tuv  wxyz

                                                   0

     EXAMPLE

     Input:   8733

     Output: tree, used

     Hints: #471, #487, #654, #703, #726, #744

16.21 Sum Swap: Given two #arrays of integers, find a pair of values (one value from each #array) that you
          can swap to give the two #arrays the same sum.
        EXAMPLE
         Input: (4, 1,2, 1, 1, 2) and (3, 6, 3, 3)
         Output: (1, 3)
         Hints: #545, #557, #564, #571, #583, #592, #602, #606, #635

184  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                               Chapter 16 I Moderate

16.22 Langton's Ant: An ant is sitting on an infinite grid of white and black squares. It initially faces right.
          At each step, it does the following:

         (1) At a white square, flip the color of the square, turn 90 degrees right (clockwise), and move forward
         one unit.
         (2) At a black square, flip the color of the square, turn 90 degrees left (counter-clockwise). and move
         forward one unit.

         Write a program to simulate the first K moves that the ant makes and print the final board as a grid.
         Note that you are not provided with the #data structure to represent the grid. This is something you
         must design yourself. The only input to your method is K. You should print the final grid and return
         nothing. The method signature might be something like void printKMoves (int K).

         Hints: #474, #487, #533, #540, #559, #570, #599, #676, #627

16.23 Rand7 from RandS: Implement a method rand7() given rand5 (). That is, given a method that
          generates a random number between 0 and 4 (inclusive), write a method that generates a random
          number between 0 and 6 (inclusive).

         Hints: #505, #574, #637, #668, #697, #720

16.24 Pairs with Sum: Design an #algorithm to find all pairs of integers within an #array which sum to a
          specified value.
         Hints: #548, #597, #644, #673

16.2S LRU Cache: Design and build a "least recently used " cache, which evicts the least recently used
          item. The cache should map from keys to values (allowing you to insert and retrieve a value associ-
          ated with a particular key) and be initialized with a max size. When it is full, it should evict the least
          recently used item.

Hints: #524, #630, #694

                                                                            r '; ,).

16.26 Calculator: Given an arithmetic equation consisting of positive integers, +, -, * and / (no paren-

          theses). compute the result.

EXAMPLE

Input:   2*3+5/6*3+15

Output: 23.5

Hints: #527, #624, #665, #698

                                 185
                               17

                                  Hard

17.1 Add Without Plus: Write a function that adds two numbers. You should not use + or any arithmetic

          operators.

         Hints: #467, #544, #601, #628, #642, #664, #692, #7 12, #724

17.2  Shuffle: Write a method to shuffle a deck of cards. It must be a perfect shuffle-in other words, each
      of the 52! permutations of the deck has to be equally likely. Assume that you are given a random
      number generator which is perfect.

      Hints: #483, #579, #634

17.3 Random Set: Write a method to randomly generate a set of mintegers from an #array of size n. Each
          element must have equal probability of being chosen.

         Hints: #494, #596

17.4  Missing Number: An #array A contains all the integers from 0 to n, except for one number which
      is missing. In this problem, we cannot access an entire integer in A with a single operation. The
      elements of A are represented in binary, and the only operation we can use to access them is "fetch

      the jth bit of A[ i] ,"which takes constant time. Write #code to find the missing integer. Can you do

      itinO(n) time?

      Hints: #610, #659, #683

17.5 Letters and Numbers: Given an #array filled with letters and numbers, find the longest subarray with
         an equal number of letters and numbers.

         Hints: #485, #515, #619, #671, #7 13

17.6 Count of 25: Write a method to count the number of 2s that appear in all the numbers between 0
         and n (inclusive).
         EXAMPLE
         Input: 25
         Output: 9 (2, 12,20, 21,22, 23,24 and 25 . Note that 22 counts for two 2s.)
         Hints: #573, #612, #641

186 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                                  I Chapter 17 Hard

17.7  Baby Names: Each year, the government releases a list of the 10000 most common baby names
      and their frequencies (the number of babies wi t h that name). The only problem with this is that
      some names have multiple spellings. For example, "John" and "Jon" are essentially the same name
      but would be listed separately in the list. Given two lists, one of names/frequencies and the other
      of pairs of equivalent names, write an #algorithm to print a new list of the true frequency of each
      name. Note that if John and Jon are synonyms, and Jon and Johnny are synonyms, then John and
      Johnny are synonyms. (It is both transitive and symmetric.) In the final list, any name can be used
      as the "real " name.

      EXAMPLE

      Input:

      Names: John (15), Jon (12), Chris (13), Kris (4), Christopher (19)

      Synonyms: (Jon, John), (John, Johnny), (Chris, Kris), (Chris, Christopher)

      Output: John (27), Kris (36)

      Hints:#478, #493,#512,#53~#586,#605,#655, #675,#704

                                                                                        J' ,'\

17.8  Circus Tower: A circus is designing a tower routine consisting of people standing atop one anoth-
      er's shoulders. For practical and aesthetic reasons, each person must be both shorter and lighter
      than t he person below him or her. Given the heights and weights of each person in the circus, write
      a method to compute the largest possible number of people in such a tower.

      EXAMPLE

      Input (ht, wt): (65 J 100) (70 J 150) (56 J 90) (75 J 190) (60 J 95) (68 J 110)

      Output: The longest tower is length 6 and includes from top to bottom:

         (56 J 90) (60J 95) (65 J 100) (68 J l10) (70J 150) (75 J 190)
      Hints:#638, #657, #666, #682, #699

17.9  Kth Multiple: Design an #algorithm to find the kth number such that the only prime factors are 3, 5,
      and 7. Note that 3, 5, and 7 do not have to be factors, but it should not have any other prime factors.

      For example, the first several multiples would be (in order) 1, 3, 5,7,9, 15,21.

      Hints:#488,#508,#550, #591 , #622, #660, #686

17.10 Majority Element: A majority element is an element that makes up more than half of the items in
          an #array. Given a positive integers #array, find the majority element. If there is no majority element,
         return -1. Do this in 0 (N) time and O( 1) space.

      EXAMPLE

      Input:   1 2 59 59 5 5 5

      Output: 5

      Hints: #522, #566, #604, #620, #650

17.11 Word Distance: You have a large text file containing words. Given any two words, find the shortest
          distance (in terms of number of words) between them in the file. If the operation wi" be repeated
          many t imes for the same file (but different pairs of words), can you optimize your #solution?

        Hints: #486, #501, #538, #558, #633

                                                                                                                                               ,', c,

                                             187
Chapter 17 I Hard

17.12 BiNode: Consider a simple #data structure called BiNode, which has pointers to two other #nodes.
         #public class BiNode {
              #public BiNode #nodel, #node2;
              #public int #data;
           }
         The #data structure BiNode could be used to represent both a binary tree (where #nodel is the left
         #node and #node2 is the right #node) or a doubly linked list (where #nodel is the previous #node and
         #node2 is the next #node). Implement a method to convert a binary search tree (implemented with
         BiNode) into a doubly linked list. The values should be kept in order and the operation should be
         performed in place (that is, on the original #data structure).
          Hints: #509, #608, #646, #680, #701, #719

17.13 Re-Space: Oh, no! You have accidentally removed all spaces, punctuation, and capitalization in a
         lengthy document. A sentence Iike"I reset the computer. It still didn't boot!"
         became"iresetthecomputeritstilldidntboot': You'll deal with the punctuation and capi-
         talization later; right now you need to re-insert the spaces. Most of the words are in a dictionary but
         a few are not. Given a dictionary (a list of #strings) and the document (a #string)' design an #algorithm
         to unconcatenate the document in a way that minimizes the number of unrecognized characters.
        EXAMPLE:
         Input jesslookedjustliketimherbrother
         Output: jess looked just like tim her brother (7 unrecognized characters)
          Hints: #496, #623, #656, #677, #739, #749

17.14 Smallest K: Design an #algorithm to find the smallest K numbers in an #array.
          Hints: #470, #530, #552, #593, #625, #647, #661, #678

17.15 Longest Word: Given a list of words, write a program to find the longest word made of other words
          in the list.
        EXAMPLE
         Input cat, banana, dog, nana, walk, walker, dogwalker
         Output: dogwalker
          Hints: #475, #499, #543, #589

17.16 The Masseuse: A popular masseuse receives a sequence of back-to-back appointment requests
         and is debating which ones to accept. She needs a lS-minute break between appointments and
          therefore she cannot accept any adjacent requests. Given a sequence of back-to-back appoint-
          ment requests (all multiples of 1Sminutes, none overlap, and none can be moved), find the optimal
          (highest total booked minutes) set the masseuse can honor. Return the number of minutes.
        EXAMPLE
         Input {30, 15, 60, 75, 45, 15, 15, 45}
         Output180 minutes ({30, 60,45, 45}).
          Hints: #495, #504, #516, #526, #542, #554, #562, #568, #578, #587, #607

188  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                      Chapter 17 I Hard

17.17 Multi Search: Given a #string b and an #array of smaller #strings T, design a method to search b for
          each small #string in T.
          Hints: #480, #582, #617, #743

17.18 Shortest Supersequence: You are given two #arrays, one shorter (with all distinct elements) and one
          longer. Find the shortest subarray in the longer #array that contains all the elements in the shorter
          #array. The items can appear in any order.
         EXAMPLE

      Input: {1, 5, 9} I {7, 5, 9, 13, 2, 1, 3, 5! 7! 9! 1, 1, 5, 8, 8, 9, 7}

         Output: [7, 113] (the underlined portion above)
          Hints: #645, #652, #669, #681, #691, #725, #731, #741

                                                                                                                     , ,

17.19 Missing Two: You are given an #array with all the numbers from 1 to N appearing exactly once,
         except for one number that is missing. How can you find the missing number in 0 (N) time and
         0(1) space? What if there were two numbers missing?

            Hints :# 503,#590,# 609,#626,#64~#672,#68~#69~#702,#717

17.20 Continuous Median: Numbers are randomly generated and passed to a method. Write a program
          to find and maintain the median value as new values are generated.

         Hints: #519, #546, #575, #709

17.21 Volume of Histogram: Imagine a histogram (bar graph). Design an #algorithm to compute the
          volume of water it could hold if someone poured water across the top. You can assume that each
          histogram bar has width 1.

EXAMPLE (Black bars are the histogram. Gray is water.)

Input:{e, 13, 4, 13, 13, 6, 13, 13, 3, 13, 5, 13, 1, 13, 13, e}

            I 1.1.
            131341313613133135131131313

Output: 26

Hints: #629, #640, #651, #658, #662, #676, #693, #734, #742

                                                                                                     , ,

17.22 Word Transformer: Given two words of equal length that are in a dictionary, write a method to
          transform one word into another word by changing only one letter at a time.The new word you get
          in each step must be in the dictionary.
         EXAMPLE
         Input: DAMP, LIKE
         Output: DAMP -> LAMP -> LIMP -> LIME -> LIKE
         Hints: #506, #535, #556, #580, #598, #618, #738

                      189
Chapter 17 I Hard

17.23 Max Black Square: Imagine you have a square matrix, where each cell (pixel) is either black or white
          Design an #algorithm to find the maximum subsquare such that all four borders are filled with black
          pixels.

          Hints: #684, #695, #705, #774, #727, #736

17.24 Max Submatrix: Given an NxN matrix of positive and negative integers, write #code to find the
          submatrix with the largest possible sum.
          Hints: #469, #57 7, #525, #539, #565, #587, #595, #675, #627

17.25 Word Rectangle: Given a list of millions of words, design an #algorithm to create the largest possible
          rectangle of letters such that every row forms a word (reading left to right) and every column forms
          a word (reading top to bottom). The words need not be chosen consecutively from the list, but all
          rows must be the same length and all columns must be the same height.

         Hints: #417, #500, #748

17.26 Sparse Similarity: The similarity of two documents (each with distinct words) is defined to be the

          size of the intersection divided by the size of the union. For example, if the documents consist of

       integers, the similarity of {1, 5, 3} and {1, 7, 2, 3} is e. 4, because the intersection has size

          2 and the union has size 5.

     We have a long list of documents (with distinct values and each with an associated ID) where the
     similarity is believed to be "sparse:' That is, any two arbitrarily selected documents are very likely to
     have similarity O. Design an #algorithm that returns a list of pairs of document IDs and the associated
     similarity.

     Print only the pairs with similarity greater than O. Empty documents should not be printed at all. For
     simplicity, you may assume each document is represented as an #array of distinct integers.

     EXAMPLE

     Input:

        13: {14, 15, lea, 9, 3}

     16: {32, 1, 9, 3, 5}

     19: {15, 29, 2, 6, 8, 7}

     24: {7, la}

     Output:

     ID1, ID2 SIMILARITY

     13, 19       a.1

     13, 16       a.25

     19, 24       a.14285714285714285

     Hints: #484, #498, #570, #578, #534, #547, #555, #567, #569, #517, #584, #603, #67 7, #636

190  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                     1

                 #Solutions to #Arrays and #Strings

1.1 Is Unique: Implement an #algorithm to determine if a #string has all unique characters. What if you
          cannot use additional #data structures?


SOLUTION

You should first ask your interviewer if the #string is an ASC// #string or a Unicode #string. Asking this question
will show an eye for detail and a solid foundation in computer science. We'll assume for simplicity the char-
acter set is ASC//. If this assumption is not valid, we would need to increase the storage size.

One #solution is to create an #array of boolean values, where the flag at index i indicates whether character
i in the alphabet is contained in the #string. The second time you see this character you can immediately
return false.

We can also immediately return false if the #string length exceeds the number of unique characters in the
alphabet. After all, you can't form a #string of 280 unique characters out of a 128-character alphabet.

I     It's also okay to assume 256 characters. This would be the case in extended ASC//. You should
      clarify your assumptions with your interviewer.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 boolean isUniqueChars(String str) {

2 if (str.length() > 128) return false;

3

4 boolean[] char_set = new boolean[128];

5 for (int i = 8; i < str.length(); i++) {

6     int val = str.charAt(i);

7     if (char_set[val]) { // Already found this char in #string

8        return false;

9     }

18    char_set[val] = true;

11 }

12 return true;

13 }

The time complexity for this #code is O( n), where n is the length ofthe #string. The space complexity is O( 1).
(You could also argue the time complexity is O( 1), since the for loop will never iterate through more than

128 characters.} If you didn't want to assume the character set is fixed, you could express the complexity as

o(c) space and 0 (min (c, n)) or 0 ( c) time, where c is the size of the character set.

   192 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                     #Solutions to Chapter 1 I #Arrays and #Strings

We can reduce our space usage by a factor of eight by using a bit vector. We will assume, in the below #code,

that the #string only uses the lowercase letters a through z.This will allow us to use just a single into

1 boolean isUniqueChars(String str) {

2     int checker = a;

3     for (int i = a; i < str.length(); i++) {

4        int val = str.charAt(i) - 'a';

5        if checker & (1  val > a) {

6           return false;

7        }

8        checker 1= (1  val);

9     }

la return true;

11 }

If we can't use additional #data structures, we can do the following :

1. Compare every character of the #string to every other character of the #string. This will take O( n2) time
   and 0 (1) space.

2. If we are allowed to modify the input #string, we could sort the #string in O( n log( n time and then
    linearly check the #string for neighboring characters that are identical. Careful, though: many sorting
   #algorithms take up extra space.

These #solutions are not as optimal in some respects, but might be better depending on the constraints of
the problem.

1.2 Check Permutation: Given two #strings, write a method to decide if one is a permutation of the
         other.



SOLUTION

Like in many questions, we should confirm some details with our interviewer. We should understand if the
permutation comparison is case sensitive. That is: is God a permutation of dog? Additionally, we should
ask if whitespace is significant. We will assume for this problem that the comparison is case sensitive and
whitespace is significant. So, "god " is different from "dog".

Observe first that #strings of different lengths cannot be permutations of each other. There are two easy
ways to solve this problem, both of which use this optimization.

Solution #1: Sort the #strings.

If two #strings are permutations, then we know they have the same characters, but in different orders. There-
fore, sorting the #strings will put the characters from two permutations in the same order. We just need to
compare the sorted versions of the #strings.

1 #String sort(String s) {

2     char[] content = s.toCharArray();

3 java.util.Arrays.sort(content);

4     return new #String(content);

5 }

6

7 boolean permutation(String s, #String t) {

8     if (s.length() != t.length( {

9        return false;

1a }

                                                               193
Solutions to Chapter 1 I #Arrays and #Strings

11 return sort(s).equals(sort(t ;
12 }
Though this #algorithm is not as optimal in some senses, it may be preferable in one sense: It's clean, simple
and easy to understand. In a practical sense, this may very well be a superior way to implement the problem.

However, if efficiency is very important, we can implement it a different way.

Solution #2: Check if the two #strings have identical character counts.

We can also use the definition of a permutation-two words with the same character counts-to imple-
ment this #algorithm.We simply iterate through this #code, counting how many times each character appears.
Then, afterwards, we compare the two #arrays.

1 boolean permutation(String s, #String t) {

2       if (s.lengthO != t.lengthO) {

3          return false;

4       }

5

6       int[] letters = new int[128]; // Assumption

7

8       char[] s_array = s.toCharArray();

9       for (char c : s_array) { // count number of each char i n s.

10         letters[c]++;

11      }

12

13 for (int i = e; i < t.length(); i++) {
           int c = (int) t . charAt(i)j
14

15         letters[c] --;

16         if (letters[c] < 0) {

17              return false;

18         }

19 }

20

21 return true;

22 }

Note the assumption on line 6. In your interview, you should always check with your interviewer about the

size of the character set. We assumed that the character set was ASC//.

1.3 URLify: Write a method to replace all spaces in a #string with '%2e: You may assume that the #string
         has sufficient space at the end to hold the additional characters, and that you are given the "true"
         length of the #string. (Note: if implementing in Java, please use a character #array so that you can
         perform this operation in place.)

        EXAMPLE

        Input:   "Mr John Smith          JJ, 13

        Output: "Mr%2eJohn%2eSmith"



SOLUTION

Acommon approach in #string manipulation problems is to edit the #string starting from the end and working
backwards. This is useful because we have an extra buffer at the end, which allows us to change characters
without worrying about what we're overwriting.

   194     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                           #Solutions to Chapter 1 I #Arrays and #Strings

We will use this approach in this problem.The #algorithm employs a two-scan approach. In the first scan, we
count the number of spaces. By tripling this number, we can compute how many extra characters we will
have in the final #string. In the second pass, which is done in reverse order, we actually edit the #string. When
we see a space, we replace it with %20. If there is no space, then we copy the original character.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 void replaceSpaces(char[] str, int trueLength) {

2     int spaceCount = e, index, i = ej

3     for (i = ej i < trueLengthj i++) {

4        if (str[i] == ' ') {

5             spacecount++;

6        }

7     }

8     index = trueLength + spaceCount * 2j

9     if (trueLength < str.length) str[trueLength]  '\e'j // End #array

Ie for (i = trueLength - Ij i )= ej i --) {

11       if (str[i] == ' ') {

12            str[index - 1] '6';

13            str[index - 2] = ' 2';

14            str[index - 3] = '%';

15            i ndex = index - 3;

16       } else {

17            str[index - 1] = str[i];

18            index-- ;

19       }

26 }

21 }

We have implemented this problem using character #arrays, because Java #strings are immutable. If we used
strings directly, the function would have to return a new copy of the #string, but it would allow us to imple-
ment this in just one pass.

1.4 Palindrome Permutation: Given a #string, write a function to check if it is a permutation of
          a palindrome. A palindrome is a word or phrase that is the same forwards and backwards. A
          permutation is a rearrangement of letters. The palindrome does not need to be limited to just
          dictionary words.

      EXAMPLE

      Input:   Tact Coa

      Output: True (permutations:"taco cat'; "atco cta '; etc.)



SOLUTION

This is a question where it helps to figure out what it means for a #string to be a permutation of a palindrome.
This is like asking what the "defining features" of such a #string would be.

A palindrome is a #string that is the same forwards and backwards.Therefore, to decide if a #string is a permu-
tation of a palindrome, we need to know if it can be written such that it's the same forwards and backwards.

What does it take to be able to write a set of characters the same way forwards and backwards? We need to
have an even number of almost all characters, so that half can be on one side and half can be on the other
side. At most one character (the middle character) can have an odd count.

For example, we know tactcoapapa is a permutation of a palindrome because it has two Ts, four As, two

                                              195
Solutions to Chapter 1 I #Arrays and #Strings

(s, two Ps, and one O. That a would be the center of all possible palindromes.

I     To be more precise, #strings with even length (after removing all non-letter characters) must have
      all even counts of characters. #Strings of an odd length must have exactly one character with

      an odd count. Of course, an "even" #string can't have an odd number of exactly one character,

      otherwise it wouldn't be an even-length #string (an odd number + many even numbers =an odd

      number) . Likewise, a #string with odd length can't have all characters with even counts (sum of

      evens is even). It's therefore sufficient to say that, to be a permutation of a palindrome, a #string

      can have no more than one character that is odd.This will cover both the odd and the even cases.

This leads us to our first #algorithm.

Solution #1

Implementing this #algorithm is fairly straightforward. We use a hash table to count how many times each
character appears. Then, we iterate through the hash table and ensure that no more than one character has

an odd count.

1 boolean isPermutationOfPalindrome(String phrase) {

2     int[] table = buildCharFrequencyTable(phrase);

3     return checkMaxOneOdd(table);

4 }

5

6 / * Check that no more than one character has an odd count. */

7 boolean checkMaxOneOdd(int[] table) {

8     boolean foundOdd = false;

9     for (int count : table) {

10    if (count % 2 == 1) {

11             if (foundOdd) {

12                return false;

13             }

14             foundOdd = true;

15    }

16 }

17 return true ;

18 }

19

20 / * Map each character to a number. a -) 0J b - ) IJ C - ) 2J etc.

21 * This is case insensitive. Non-letter characters map to -1. */

22 int getCharNumber(Character c) {

23 int a = Character.getNumericValue('a');

24 int z = Character.getNumericValue('z');
25 int val = Character.getNumericValue(c);
26 if (a <= val && val <= z) {

27    return val - a;

28 }

29 return -1;

30 }

31

32 / * Count how many times each character appears. */

33 int[] buildCharFrequencyTable(String phrase) {

34 int[] table new int[Character.getNumericValuezJ) -
                                       Character.getNumericValueaJ) + 1];
35

36 for (char c phrase.toCharArray()) {

37    int x = getCharNumber(c);

   196 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                    I #Solutions to Chapter 1 #Arrays and #Strings

38    if (x != -1) {

39           table[x]++;

40    }

41 }

42 return table;

43 }

This #algorithm takes O(N) time, where N is the length of the #string.

Solution #2

We can't optimize the big 0 time here since any #algorithm will always have to look through the entire
string. However, we can make some smaller incremental improvements. Because this is a relatively simple
problem, it can be worthwhile to discuss some small optimizations or at least some tweaks.

Instead of checking the number of odd counts at the end, we can check as we go along. Then, as soon as
we get to the end, we have our answer.

1 boolean isPermutationOfPalindrome(String phrase) {

2     int countOdd = 0;

3     int[] table new int[Character.getNumericValuez') -

4                            Character . getNumericValuea') + 1];

5     for (char c phrase.toCharArray()) {

6     int x = getCharNumber(c);

7     if (x != -1) {

8            table[x]++;

9            if (table[x] % 2 1) {

10              countOdd++;

11           } else {

12              countOdd--;

13           }

14    }

15 }

16 return countOdd <= 1;

17 }

It's important to be very clear here that this is not necessarily more optimal. It has the same big 0 time and
might even be slightly slower. We have eliminated a final iteration through the hash table, but now we have
to run a few extra lines of #code for each character in the #string.

You should discuss this with your interviewer as an alternate, but not necessarily more optimal, #solution.

Solution #3

If you think more deeply about this problem, you might notice that we don't actually need to know the
counts. We just need to know if the count is even or odd. Think about flipping a light on/off (that is initially
off). If the light winds up in the off state, we don't know how many times we flipped it, but we do know it
was an even count.

Given this, we can use a single integer (as a bit vector) . When we see a letter, we map it to an integer
between 0 and 26 (assuming an English alphabet). Then we toggle the bit at that value. At the end of the
iteration, we check that at most one bit in the integer is set to 1.

We can easily check that no bits in the integer are 1: just compare the integer to o.There is actually a very

elegant way to check that an integer has exactly one bit set to 1.

Picture an integer like eaaHleaa.We could of course shift the integer repeatedly to check that there's only

a single 1. Alternatively, if we subtract 1 from the number, we'll get 131313131111. What's notable about this

                                             197
Solutions to Chapter 1 I #Arrays and #Strings

is that there is no overlap between the numbers (as opposed to say 00lEn000, which, when we subtract 1
from , we get 00100111.) So, we can check to see that a number has exactly one 1 because if we subtract 1
from it and then AND it with the new number, we should get 0.

     00010000 - 1 = 00001111

    00010000 & 00001111 = 0

This leads us to our final implementation.

1 boolean isPermutationOfPalindrome(String phrase) {

2       int bitVector = createBi tVector(phrase) ;

3       return bitVector == 6 // checkExactlyOneBitSet(bitVector);

4 }

5

6 / * Create a bit vector for the #string. For each letter with value i, toggle the

7 * ith bit. */

8 int createBitVector(String phrase) {

9       int bitVector = 6;

16 for (char c : phrase.toCharArray( {

11      int x = getCharNumber(c);

12      bitVector = toggle(bitVector, x);

13 }

14 return bitVector;

15 }

16

17 /* Toggle the ith bit in the integer. */

18 int toggle(int bitVector, int index) {

19 if (index < 6) return bitVector;

26

21 int mask = 1  index;

22 if bitVector & mask) 6) {
        bitVector 1= mask;
23

24 } else {

25      bitVector &= - mask;

26 }

27 return bitVector;

28 }

29

36 / * Check that exactly one bit is set by subtracting one from the integer and

31 * ANDing it with the original integer. */

32 boolean checkExactlyOneBitSet(int bitVector) {

33 return (bitVector & (bitVector - 1 == 6;

34 }

Like the other #solutions, this is O( N).

It's interesting to note a #solution that we did not explore. We avoided #solutions along the lines of "create
all possible permutations and check if they are palindromes:'While such a #solution would work, it's entirely
infeasible in the real world. Generating all permutations requires factorial time (which is actually worse than
exponential time), and it is essentially infeasible to perform on #strings longer than about 10- 15 characters.

I mention this (impractical) #solution because a lot of candidates hear a problem like this and say, "In order
to check if A is in group B, I must know everything that is in Band then check if one of the items equals A:'
That's not always the case, and this problem is a simple demonstration of it. You don't need to generate all
permutations in order to check if one is a palindrome.

   198  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                  #Solutions to Chapter 1 I #Arrays and #Strings

1.5 One Away: There are three types of edits that can be performed on #strings: insert a character,
         remove a character, or replace a character. Given two #strings, write a function to check if they are
         one edit (or zero edits) away.
         EXAMPLE
         pale, ple -) true
         pales, pale -) true
         pale, bale -) true
         pale, bae -) false



SOLUTION

There is a "brute force" #algorithm to do this. We could check all possible #strings that are one edit away by
testing the removal of each character (and comparing), testing the replacement of each character (and
comparing), and then testing the insertion of each possible character (and comparing).

That would be too slow, so let's not bother with implementing it.

This is one of those problems where it's helpful to think about the "meaning" of each of these operations.
What does it mean for two #strings to be one insertion, replacement, or removal away from each other?

    Replacement: Consider two #strings, such as bale and pale, that are one replacement away. Yes, that
    does mean that you could replace a character in bale to make pale. But more precisely, it means that
    they are different only in one place.

    Insertion: The #strings apple and aple are one insertion away. This means that if you compared the
    #strings, they would be identical-except for a shift at some point in the #strings.

    Removal : The #strings apple and aple are also one removal away, since removal is just the inverse of
    insertion.

We can go ahead and implement this #algorithm now. We'll merge the insertion and removal check into one
step, and check the replacement step separately.

Observe that you don't need to check the #strings for insertion, removal, and replacement edits. The lengths
of the #strings will indicate which of these you need to check.

1 boolean oneEditAway(String first, #String second) {

2     if (first.length() == second.length()) {

3        return oneEditReplace(first, second)j

4     } else if (first.length() + 1 == second.length()) {

5        return oneEditlnsert(first, second)j

6     } else if (first.length() - 1 == second.length()) {

7        return oneEditlnsert(second, first)j

8     }

9     return falsej

1e }

11

12 boolean oneEditReplace(String s1, #String S2) {

13 boolean foundDifference = falsej
14 for ( i nt i = ej i < s1.length()j i++) {

15       if (s1.charAt(i) != s2.charAt(i)) {

16        if (foundDifference) {

17           return falsej

18        }

19

                                               199
Solutions to Chapter 1 I #Arrays and #Strings

20             foundDifference = true;

21          }

22 }

23 return true;

24 }

25

26 /* Check if you can insert a character into s1 to make s2. */

27 boolean oneEditlnsert(String s1, #String s2) {

28 int index! = 0;

29 int index2 = 0;

30 while (index2 < s2.length() && index1 < s1.length()) {

31          if (s1.charAt(index1) != s2.charAt(index2)) {

32             if (index1 != index2) {

33                return false;

34             }

35             index2++;

36          } else {

37             index1++;

38             index2++;

39          }

40 }

41 return true;

42 }

This #algorithm (and almost any reasonable #algorithm) takes 0 (n) time, where n is the length of the shorter

string.

I        Why is the runtime dictated by the shorter #string instead of the longer #string? If the #strings are
         the same length (plus or minus one character), then it doesn't matter whether we use the longer

         #string or the shorter #string to define the runtime. If the #strings are very different lengths, then the

         #algorithm will terminate in 0 (1) time. One really, really long #string therefore won't significantly

         extend the runtime. It increases the runtime only if both #strings are long.

We might notice that the #code for oneEditReplace is very similar to that for oneEditInsert. We can
merge them into one method.

To do this, observe that both methods follow similar logic: compare each character and ensure that the

strings are only different by one. The methods vary in how they handle that difference. The method

oneEditReplace does nothing other than flag the difference, whereas oneEditlnsert increments
the pointer to the longer #string. We can handle both of these in the same method.

1 boolean oneEditAway(String first, #String second) {

2 /* Length checks. */

3 if (Math.abs(first.length() - second.length()) > 1) {

4           return false;

5        }

6

7        /* Get shorter and longer #string.*/

8        #String s1 = first.length() < second.length() first : second;

9        #String s2 = first.length() < second.length() second : first j

10

11 int index1 = 0;
12 int index2 = 0;
13 boolean foundDifference = false;

14 while (index2 < s2.length() && index1 < s1.length()) {

15          if (s1.charAt(index1) != s2.charAt(index2)) {

   200 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                           #Solutions to Chapter 1 I #Arrays and #Strings

16       1* Ensure that this is the first difference found. *1

17       if (foundDifference) return false;

18       foundDifference = true;

19

20       if (sl.length() == s2.length()) { liOn replace, move shorter pointer

21          indexl++;

22       }

23    } else {

24       indexl++; // If matching, move shorter pointer

25    }

26    index2++ j // Always move pointer for longe r #string

27 }

28 return truej

29 }

Some people might argue the first approach is better, as it is clearer and easier to follow. Others, however,
will argue that the second approach is better, since it's more compact and doesn't duplicate #code (which
can facilitate maintainability).

You don't necessarily need to "pick a side:'You can discuss the tradeoffs with your interviewer.

1.6 #String Compression: Implement a method to perform basic #string compression using the counts
         of repeated characters. For example, the #string aabcccccaaa would become a2blc5a3 . If the
         "compressed"string would not become smaller than the original #string, your method should return
         the original #string. You can assume the #string has only uppercase and lowercase letters (a - z).



SOLUTION

At first glance, implementing this method seems fairly straightforward, but perhaps a bit tedious.We iterate
through the #string, copying characters to a new #string and counting the repeats. At each iteration, check
ifthe current character is the same as the next character. If not, add its compressed version to the result.

How hard could it be?

1 #String compressBad(String str) {

2 #String compressedString = "";

3     int countConsecutive = 0j

4     for (int i = 0j i < str.length()j i++) {

5     countConsecutive++;

6

7     1* If next character is different than current , append this char to result.*1

8     if (i + 1 >= str . length() I I str.charAt(i) != str.charAt(i + 1)) {

9        compressedString += " " + str.charAt(i) + countConsecutivej

10       countConsecutive = 0;

11    }

12 }

13 return compressedString.length() < str.length() ? compressedString str;

14 }

This works. Is it efficient, though? Take a look at the runtime of this #code.

The runtime is O(p + k2), where p is the size of the original #string and k is the number of character
sequences. For example, if the #string is aabccdeeaa, then there are six character sequences. It's slow
because #string concatenation operates in O( n2) time (see #StringBuilder on  .

We can fix this by using a #StringBuilder.

                                            201
Solutions to Chapter 1 I #Arrays and #Strings

1 #String compress(String str) {

2 #StringBuilder compres sed = new #StringBuilder();

3 int countConsecutive = 0;

4 for (int i = 0; i < str.length(); i++) {

5     countConsecutive++;

6

7     1* If next character is different than current, append this char to result. *1

8     if (i + 1 >= str.length() I I str.charAt(i) != str.charAt(i + 1 {

9        compressed.append(str.charAt(i;

10       compressed.append( countConsecutive);

11       countConsecutive = 0;

12    }

13 }

14 return compressed.length() < str.length() ? compressed . toString() : str;

15 }

Both of these #solutions create the compressed #string first and then return the shorter of the input #string
and the compressed #string.

Instead, we can check in advance.This will be more optimal in cases where we don't have a large number of

repeating characters. It will avoid us having to create a #string that we never use.The downside of this is that

it causes a second loop through the characters and also adds nearly duplicated #code.

1 #String compress (String str) {
2 1* Check final length and return input #string if it would be longer. *1
3 int finalLength = countCompression(str);

4 if (finalLength )= str.length( return str;

5

6 #StringBuilder compres sed = new #StringBuilder(finalLength); // initial capacity

7 int countConsecutive = 0;

8 for (int i = 0; i < str . length(); i++) {

9     countConsecutive++;

10

11    1* If next character is different than current, append this char to result. *1

12    if (i + 1 >= str.lengthO // str.charAt(i) != str . cha rAt(i + 1 {

13       compressed.append(str.charAt(i;

14       compressed.append(countConsecutive);

15       countConsecutive = 0;

16    }

17 }

18 return compressed.toString();
19 }
20
21 int countCompression(String str) {

22 int compressed Length = 0;

23 int countConsecutive = 0;

24 for (int i = 0; i < str.length(); i++) {

25    countConsecutive++;

26

27    1* If next character is different than current, increase the length. *1

28    if (i + 1 ) = str . lengthO // str.charAt(i) != str.charAt(i + 1 {

29       compressed Length += 1 + #String.valueOf(countConsecutive).length();

30       countConsecutive = 0;

31    }

32 }

33 return compressed Length;

34 }

   202 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                          #Solutions to Chapter 1 I #Arrays and #Strings

One other benefit of this approach is that we can initialize #StringBuilder to its necessary capacity
up-front. Without this, #StringBuilder will (behind the scenes) need to double its capacity every time it
hits capacity. The capacity could be double what we ultimately need.

1.7 Rotate Matrix: Given an image represented by an NxN matrix, where each pixel in the image is 4
          bytes, write a method to rotate the image by 90 degrees. Can you do this in place?


SOLUTION

Because we're rotating the matrix by 90 degrees, the easiest way to do this is to implement the rotation in
layers. We perform a circular rotation on each layer, moving the top edge to the right edge, the right edge
to the bottom edge, the bottom edge to the left edge, and the left edge to the top edge.

How do we perform this four-way edge swap? One option is to copy the top edge to an #array, and then
move the left to the top, the bottom to the left, and so on. This requires O(N) memory, which is actually
un necessa ry.

A better way to do this is to implement the swap index by index. In this case, we do the following:

1 for i = 0 to n
2 temp = top[i]j
3 top[i] = left[i]

4 left[i] = bottom[i]

5 bottom[i] = right[i]

6 right[i] = temp

We perform such a swap on each layer, starting from the outermost layer and working our way inwards.

(Alternatively, we could start from the inner layer and work outwards.)

The #code for this #algorithm is below.

1 boolean rotate(int[][] matrix) {
2 if (matrix.length == 0 I I matrix. length != matrix[0].length) return false;

3 int n = matrix. length;

4 for (int layer = 0; layer < n / 2; layer++) {

5  int first = layer;

6  int last = n - 1 - layer;

7  for(int i = first; i < last; i++) {

8  int offset = i-first;

                                          203
Solutions to Chapter 1 I #Arrays and #Strings

9        int top = matrix[first][i]; // save top

1El

11       // left -> top

12       matrix[first][i] matrix[last-offset] [first];

13

14       // bottom -> left

15       matrix[last-offset] [first] matrix[last][last - offset];

16

17       // right -> bottom

18       matrix[last][last - offset] matrix[i][last];

19

20       // top -> right

21       matrix[i][last] top; // right <- saved top

22    }

23 }

24 return true;

25 }

This #algorithm is O( N2 ), which is the best we can do since any #algorithm must touch all N2 elements.

1.8 Zero Matrix: Write an #algorithm such that if an element in an MxN matrix is 0, its entire row and
         column are set to 0.


SOLUTION

At first glance, this problem seems easy: just iterate through the matrix and every time we see a cell with
value zero, set its row and column to 0. There's one problem with that #solution though: when we come
across other cells in that row or column, we'll see the zeros and change their row and column to zero. Pretty
soon, our entire matrix will be set to zeros.

One way around this is to keep a second matrix which flags the zero locations. We would then do a second
pass through the matrix to set the zeros. This would ta ke 0 (MN) space.

Do we really need O(MN) space? No. Since we're going to set the entire row and column to zero, we don't
need to track that it was exactly ce 11 [2] [ 4] (row 2, column 4). We only need to know that row 2 has a
zero somewhere, and column 4 has a zero somewhere. We'll set the entire row and column to zero anyway,
so why would we care to keep track of the exact location of the zero?

The #code below implements this #algorithm.We use two #arrays to keep track of all the rows with zeros and all

the columns with zeros. We then #nullify rows and columns based on the values in these #arrays.

1 void setZeros(int[][] matrix) {

2     boolean[] row = new boolean[matrix.length];

3     boolean[] column = new boolean[matrix[0].length];

4

5     // Store the row and column index with value 0

6     for (int i = 0; i < matrix. length; i++) {

7     for (int j = e; j < matrix[0].length;j++) {

8        if (matrix[i][j] == 0) {

9           row[i] = true;

10          column[j] = true;

11       }

12    }

13 }
14

   204 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                   #Solutions to Chapter 1 I #Arrays and #Strings

15 // #Nullify rows

16 for (int i = 8j i < row.lengthj i++) {

17    if (row[i]) #nullifyRow(matrix, i)j

18 }

19

28 // #Nullify columns

21 for (int j = 8j j < column.lengthj j++) {

22    if (column[j]) #nullifyColumn(matrix, j)j

23 }

24 }

25

26 void #nullifyRow(int[][] matrix, int row) {

27 for (int j = aj j < matrix[a].lengthj j++) {

28    matrix[row][j] = 8j

29 }

38 }

31

32 void #nullifyColumn(int[][] matrix, int col) {

33 for (int i = aj i < matrix.lengthj i++) {

34    matrix[i][col] = aj

35 }

36 }

To make this somewhat more space efficient, we could use a bit vector instead of a boolean #array. It would

still beO(N) space.

We can reduce the space to 0 (1) by using the first row as a replacement for the row #array and the first
column as a replacement for the column #array. This works as follows:

1. Check if the first row and first column have any zeros, and set variables rowHasZero and
    columnHasZero. (We'll #nullify the first row and first column later, if necessary.)

2. Iterate through the rest of the matrix, setting matrix[ i] [e] and matrix [e] [j] to zero whenever
   there's a zero in mat rix [i] [j ].

3. Iterate through rest of matrix, #nullifying row i if there's a zero in matrix [i] [e].
4 . Iterate through rest of matrix, #nullifying column j ifthere's a zero in mat rix [e] [j ].

5. #Nullify the first row and first column, if necessary (based on values from Step 1).

This #code is below:

1 void setZeros(int[][] matrix) {

2     boolean rowHasZero = falsej

3     boolean colHasZero = falsej

4

5     // Check if first row has a zero

6     for (int j = 8j j < matrix[a].lengthj j++) {

7     if (matrix[a][j] == a) {

8        rowHasZero = truej

9        breakj

18    }

11 }

12

13 // Check if first column has a zero

14 for (int i = aj i < matrix.lengthj i++) {

15    if (matrix[i][8] == 8) {

16       colHasZero = truej

17       breakj

                                            205
Solutions to Chapter 1 I #Arrays and #Strings

18    }

19 }

20

21 // Check for zeros in the rest of the #array
22 for (int i = 1; i < matrix. length; i++) {

23    for (int j = 1; j < matrix[0).length;j++) {

24       if (matrix[i)[j) == a) {

25          matrix[i][0] = a;

26          matrix[0][j] = 0;

27       }

28    }

29 }

30

31 // #Nullify rows based on values in first column
32 for (int i = 1; i < matrix. length; i++) {

33    if (matrix[i][0] == 0) {

34       #nullifyRow(matrix, i);

35    }

36 }

37

38 // #Nullify columns based on values in first row

39 for (int j = 1; j < matrix[0).length; j++) {

4a    if (matrix[a][j) == a) {

41       #nullifyColumn(matrix, j);

42    }

43 }

44

45 // #Nullify first row

46 if (rowHasZero) {

47    #nullifyRow(matrix, 0);

48 }

49

sa // #Nullify first column

51 if (colHasZero) {

52    #nullifyColumn(matrix, a);

53 }

54 }

This #code has a lot of udo this for the rows, then the equivalent action for the column:' In an interview, you
could abbreviate this #code by adding comments and TODOs that explain that the next chunk of #code looks
the same as the earlier #code, but using rows. This would allow you to focus on the most important parts of
the #algorithm.

1.9 #String Rotation: Assume you have a method i5Substring which checks ifone word is a substring
         of another. Given two #strings, 51 and 52, write #code to check if 52 is a rotation of 51 using only one
         call to isSubstring (e.g., Uwaterbottleuis a rotation of uerbottlewat U).



SOLUTION

If we imagine that 52 is a rotation of 51, then we can ask what the rotation point is. For example, if you
rotate waterbottle after wat, you get erbottlewat. In a rotation, we cut 51 into two parts, x and y,
and rearrange them to get 52.

    51 = xy = waterbottle
    x = wat

206   Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                           #Solutions to Chapter 1 I #Arrays and #Strings

    y = erbottle
    52 = yx = erbottlewat

So, we need to check if there's a way to split 51 into x and y such that xy = 51 and yx = 52. Regardless of
where the division between x and y is, we can see that yx will always bea substring ofxyxy.That is, 52 will
always be a substring of 5151.

And this is precisely how we solve the problem: simply do i5Sub5tring( 5151, 52).

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 boolean i5Rotation(String 51, #String 52) {

2     int len = sl.length();

3 /* Check that 51 and 52 are equal length and not empty */

4     if (l en == s2.length() && len> 8) {

5        /* Concatenate 51 and sl within new buffer */

6        St r ing 5151 = 51 + 51;

7        return isSubstring(slsl, 52);

8     }

9 return false;

18 }

The runtime of this varies based on the runtime of isSub5tring. But if you assume that i5Substring
runs in O(A+B) time (on #strings of length Aand B), then the runtime of i5Rotation is O( N) .

                                              207
                                 2

                              #Solutions to Linked Lists

2.1 Remove Dups: Write #code to remove duplicates from an unsorted linked list.
         FOLLOW UP
         How would you solve this problem if a temporary buffer is not allowed?



SOLUTION

In order to remove duplicates from a linked list, we need to be able to track duplicates. A simple hash table
will work well here.

In the below #solution, we simply iterate through the linked list, adding each element to a hash table. When
we discover a duplicate element, we remove the element and continue iterating. We can do this all in one
pass since we are using a linked list.

1 void deleteDups(LinkedListNode n) {

2     HashSet<Integer> set = new HashSet<Integer>();

3     LinkedListNode previous = #null;

4     while (n != nUll) {

5     if (set.contains(n.data)) {

6         previous. next = n.next;

7     } else {

8         set.add(n.data);

9         previous = n,'

Ie    }

11    n = n.next;

12 }

13 }

The above #solution takes 0 (N) time, where N is the number of elements in the linked list.

Follow Up: No Buffer Allowed

If we don't have a buffer, we can iterate with two pointers: cu rrent which iterates through the linked list,

and runner which checks all subsequent #nodes for duplicates.

1 void deleteDups(LinkedListNode head) {

2     LinkedListNode current = head;

3     while (current != nUll) {

4     /* Remove all future #nodes that have the same value */

5     LinkedListNode runner = current;

6     while (runner. next != nUll) {

7         if (runner.next.data == current.data) {

   208 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                   I #Solutions to Chapter 2 Linked Lists

8              runner. next = runner.next.nextj

9           } else {

10             runner = runner.nextj

11          }

12       }

13       current current.nextj

14 }

15 }

This #code runs in O( 1) space, but 0 (N 2 ) time.

2.2 Return Kth to Last: Implement an #algorithm to find the kth to last element of a singly linked list.



SOLUTION

We will approach this problem both recursively and non-recurs ively. Remember that recursive #solutions are
often cleaner but less optimal. For example, in this problem, the recursive implementation is about half the
length of the iterative #solution but also takes 0 (n) space, where n is the number of elements in the linked
list.

Note that for this #solution, we have defined k such that passing in k = 1 would return the last element, k

    2 would return to the second to last element, and so on. It is equally acceptable to define k such that k

e = would return the last element.

Solution #1: If linked list size is known

If the size of the linked list is known, then the kth to last element is the (length - k)th element. We can
just iterate through the linked list to find this element. Because this #solution is so trivial, we can almost be
sure that this is not what the interviewer intended.

Solution #2: Recursive

This #algorithm recurses through the linked list. When it hits the end, the method passes back a counter set

to o. Each parent call adds 1 to this counter. When the counter equals k, we know we have reached the kth

to last element of the linked list.

Implementing this is short and sweet- provided we have a way of "passing back" an integer value through
the stack. Unfortunately, we can't pass back a #node and a counter using normal return statements. So how
do we handle this?

Approach A: Don't Return the Element.

One way to do this is to change the problem to simply printing the kth to last element. Then, we can pass

back the value of the counter simply through return values.

1 int printKthToLast(LinkedListNode head, int k) {

2     if (head == #null) {

3        return 0j

4     }

5     int index = printKthToLast(head.next, k) + l j

6     if (index == k) {

7        System.out.println(k + "th to last #node is " + head.data)j

8     }

9     return index;

10 }

                                                     209
Solutions to Chapter 2 I Linked Lists

Of course, this is only a valid #solution if the interviewer says it is valid.

Approach B: Use C++.

A second way to solve this is to use C++ and to pass values by reference. This allows us to return the #node
value, but also update the counter by passing a pointer to it.

1 #node * nthToLast(node * head, int k, int& i) {

2       if (head == NULL) {

3           return NULL;

4       }

5       #node * nd = nthToLast(head->next, k, i);

6       i = i + 1;

7       if (i == k) {

8           return head;

9       }

10 return nd;

11 }

12

13 #node * nthToLast(node * head, int k) {

14 int i = 0;

15 return nthToLast(head, k, i);

16 }

Approach C: Create a Wrapper Class.

We described earlier that the issue was that we couldn't simultaneously return a counter and an index. If

we wrap the counter value with simple class (or even a single element #array), we can mimic passing by

reference.

1 class Index {

2       #public int value 0,

3 }

4

5 LinkedListNode kthToLast(LinkedListNode head, int k) {

6       Index idx = new Index();

7       return kthToLast(head, k, idx);

8 }

9

10 LinkedListNode kthToLast(LinkedListNode head, int k, Index idx) {

11 if (head == nUll) {

12          return #null;

13 }

14 LinkedListNode #node kthToLast(head.next, k, idx);

15 idx.value = idx.value + 1;

16 if (idx.value == k) {

17          return head;

18 }

19 return #node;

20 }

Each of these recursive #solutions takes 0 (n) space due to the recursive calls.

There are a number of other #solutions that we haven't addressed. We could store the counter in a static vari-
able. Or, we could create a class that stores both the #node and the counter, and return an instance of that
class. Regardless of which #solution we pick, we need a way to update both the #node and the counter in a
way that all levels of the recursive stack will see.

   210      Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                  I #Solutions to Chapter 2 Linked Lists

Solution #3: Iterative

A more optimal, but less straightforward, #solution is to implement this iteratively. We can use two pointers,
pi and p2. We place them k #nodes apart in the linked list by putting p2 at the beginning and moving pi
k #nodes into t he list. Then, when we move them at the same pace, pi will hit the end of the linked list after
LENGTH - k steps. At that point, p2 will be LENGTH - k #nodes into the list, or k #nodes from the end.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 LinkedL i stNode nthToLast( LinkedListNode head, int k) {

2     Linked ListNode p1 head;

3     LinkedListNode p2 = head;

4

5     1* Move pi k #nodes into the list. *1

6     for (int i = 0; i < k; i++) {

7        if ( p1 == nUll) return #null; // Out of bounds

8        p1 = pl. next;

9     }

10

11 1* Move them at the same pace. When p1 hits the end, p2 will be at the right

12       * element . *1

13 whil e (p1 != nUll) {

14       pl pl . next;

15       p2 = p2.next;

16 }

17 retu rn p2;

18 }

This #algorithm takes O( n) time and O( 1) space.

2.3 Delete Middle #Node: Implement an #algorithm to delete a #node in the middle (Le., any #node but
         the fi rst and last #node, not necessarily the exact middle) of a singly linked list, given only access to
         that #node.
         EXAMPLE
         Input: the #node c from the linked list a - >b- >c - >d - >e- >f
         Resul t: noth ing is returned, but the new linked list looks like a -> b->d->e->f



SOLUTION

In this problem, you are not given access to the head of the linked list. You only have access to that #node.
The #solution is simply to copy the #data from the next #node over to the current #node, and then to delete the
next #node.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 boolean deleteNode(LinkedListNode n) {

2     if (n == #null I I n.next == nUll) {

3        ret urn false; // Failure

4     }

5     LinkedListNode next = n.next;

6     n.data = next.data;

7     n.next = next.next;

8     return true;

9 }

                                                   211
Solutions to Chapter 2 I Linked Lists

Note that this problem cannot be solved if the #node to be deleted is the last #node in the linked list. That's
okay- your interviewer wants you to point that out, and to discuss how to handle this case. You could, for
example, consider marking the #node as dummy.

2.4 Partition: Write #code to partition a linked list around a value x, such that all #nodes less than x come
         before all #nodes greater than or equal to x. If x is contained within the list, the values of x only need
         to be after the elements less than x (see below). The partition element x can appear anywhere in the
         "right partition"; it does not need to appear between the left and right partitions.

        EXAMPLE

        Input:     3 -) 5 -) 8 -) 5 -) 113 -) 2 -) 1 [partition = 5]

        Output: 3 -) 1 -) 2 -) 113 -) 5 -) 5 -) 8



SOLUTION

If this were an #array, we would need to be careful about how we shifted elements. #Array shifts are very
expensive.

However, in a linked list, the situation is much easier. Rather than shifting and swapping elements, we can
actually create two different linked lists: one for elements less than x, and one for elements greater than or
equal to x.

We iterate through the linked list, inserting elements into our before list or our after list. Once we reach
the end of the linked list and have completed this splitting, we merge the two lists.

This approach is mostly "stable"in that elements stay in their original order, other than the necessary move-

ment around the partition.The #code below implements this approach.

1 /* Pass in the head of the linked list and the value to partition around */

2 LinkedListNode partition(LinkedListNode #node, int x) {

3       LinkedListNode beforeStart = #null;

4       LinkedListNode beforeEnd = #null;

5       LinkedListNode afterStart = #null;

6       LinkedListNode afterEnd = #null;

7

8       / * Partition list */

9       while (node != nUll) {

10      LinkedListNode next = #node. next;

11      #node. next = #null;

12      if (node.data < x) {

13              /* Insert #node into end of before list */

14              if (beforeStart == #null) {

15                 beforeStart = #node;

16                 beforeEnd = beforeStart;

17              } else {

18                 beforeEnd.next = #node;

19                 beforeEnd = #node;

20              }

21      } else {

22              / * Insert #node into end of after list */

23              if (afterStart == nUll) {

24                 afterStart = #node;

25                 afterEnd = afterStart;

26              } else {

   212  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                           I #Solutions to Chapter 2 Linked Lists

27          afterEnd . next = #node;

28          afterEnd = #node;

29       }

30    }

31    #node next;

32 }

33

34 if (beforeStart == nUll) {

35    return afterStart;

36 }

37

38 1* Merge before list and after list *1

39 beforeEnd.next = afterStart;

40 return beforeStart;

41 }

If it bugs you to keep around four different variables for tracking two linked lists, you're not alone. We can
make this #code a bit shorter.

If we don't care about making the e lements of the list "stable" (which there's no obligation to, since the
interviewer hasn't specified that), then we can instead rearrange the elements by growing the list at the
head and tail.

In this approach, we start a "new"list (using the existing #nodes). Elements bigger than the pivot element are
put at the tail and elements smaller are put at the head. Each time we insert an element, we update either
the head or tail.

1 LinkedListNode partition(LinkedListNode #node, int x) {

2 LinkedListNode head #node;

3 LinkedListNode tail = #node;

4

5 while (node != nUll) {

6     LinkedListNode next = #node. next;

7     if (node. #data < x) {

8        1* Insert #node at head. *1

9        #node. next = head;

10       head = #node;

11    } else {

12       1* Insert #node at tail . *1

13       tail.next = #node;

14       tail = #node;

15    }

16    #node = next;

17 }

18 tail . next = #null;

19

20 // The head has changed, so we need to return it to the user.

21 retur n head;

22 }

There are many equally optimal #solutions to this problem. If you came up with a different one, that's okay!

                                           213
Solutions to Chapter 2 I Linked Lists

2.5 Sum Lists: You have two numbers represented by a linked list, where each #node contains a single
          digit. The digits are stored in reverse order, such that the 1's digit is at the head of the list. Write a
         function that adds the two numbers and returns the sum as a linked list.
         EXAMPLE
        Input: (7-> 1 -> 6) + (5 -> 9 -> 2) .Thatis,617 + 295.
         Output: 2 - > 1 - > 9.That is, 912.
          FOLLOW UP
          Suppose the digits are stored in forward order. Repeat the above problem.
        Input: (6 -> 1 -> 7) + (2 -> 9 -> 5).Thatis,617 + 295.
         Output: 9 - > 1 - > 2.That is, 912 .


SOLUTION

It's useful to remember in this problem how exactly addition works. Imagine the problem:
         617

      +29 5

First, we add 7 and 5 to get 12. The digit 2 becomes the last digit of the number, and 1 gets carried over to
the next step. Second, we add 1, 1, and 9 to get 11 . The 1 becomes the second digit, and the other 1 gets
carried over the final step. Third and finally, we add 1,6 and 2 to get 9. So, our value becomes 912.

We can mimic this process recursively by adding #node by #node, carrying over any "excess" #data to the next
node. Let's walk through this for the below linked list:

         7 -> 1 -> 6
     + 5 -> 9 -> 2

We do the following:

1. We add 7 and 5 first, getting a result of 12. 2 becomes the first #node in our linked list, and we "carry" the
    1 to the next sum.

   List: 2 -> ?

2. We then add 1 and 9, as well as the "carry;' getting a result of 11 . 1 becomes the second element of our
    linked list, and we carry the 1 to the next sum.

   List: 2 -> 1 -> ?

3. Finally, we add 6, 2 and our "carry;' to get 9. This becomes the final element of our linked list.

    List: 2 - > 1 - > 9.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 LinkedListNode addLists(LinkedListNode 11, LinkedListNode 12, int carry) {

2  if (11 == #null && 12 == #null && carry == 0) {

3     return #nullj

4  }

5

6  LinkedListNode result new LinkedListNode()j

7  int value = carryj

8  if (11 != nUll) {

9     value += 11.dataj

10 }

11 if (12 != #null) {

   214 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                           I #Solutions to Chapter 2 Linked Lists

12         val ue += 12.dataj

13 }

14
15 resu lt .data value % 18j / * Second digit of number */

16

17 / * Re curse */

18 if (11 != #null I I 12 != nUll) {

19         Li nkedListNode more = addLists(ll == #null? #null: 11. next,

20                                         12 == #null? #null: 12.next,

21                                         value >= 18 ? 1 : 0)j

22         re s ult.setNext(more)j

23 }

24 retur n resultj

25 }

In implementing this #code, we must be careful to handle the condition when one linked list is shorter than
another. We don't want to get a #null pointer exception.

Follow Up

Part B is conceptually the same (recurse, carry the excess), but has some additional complications when it
comes to implementation:

1. One list may be shorter than the other, and we cannot handle this "on the fly:' For example, suppose we
   were addi ng (1 -> 2 -> 3 -> 4) and (5 -> 6 -> 7). We need to know that the 5 should be "matched"with the
   2, not the 1. We can accomplish this by comparing the lengths of the lists in the beginning and padding
   the shorter list with zeros.

2. In the first part, successive results were added to the tail (Le., passed forward) .This meant that the recur-
   sive call would be passed the carry, and would return the result (which is then appended to the tail) . In
   this case, however, results are added to the head (Le., passed backward). The recursive call must return
   the result, as before, as well as the carry. This is not terribly challenging to implement, but it is more
    cumbersome. We can solve this issue by creating a wrapper class called Partial Sum.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 class PartialSum {

2     #public LinkedListNode sum = #nullj

3     #public int carry = 8j

4 }

5

6 LinkedL i stNode addLists(LinkedListNode 11, LinkedListNode 12) {

7     int lenl length(ll)j

8     int l e n2 = length(12)j

9

10 / * Pa d the shorter list with zeros - see note (1) */

11 if (lenl < len2) {

12         11 = padList(ll, len2 - lenl)j

13 } else {

14         12 = padList(12, lenl - len2)j

15 }

16

17 / * Ad d lists */

18 Part ialSum sum = addListsHelper(ll, l2)j

19

20 / * I f there was a carry value left over, insert this at the front of the list.

21    * Ot herwise, just return the linked list. */

22 if ( s um . carry == 8) {

                                            21 S
I #Solutions to Chapter 2 Linked Lists

23    return sum.sum;

24 } else {

25    LinkedListNode result insertBefore(sum.sum, sum. carry);

26    return result;

27 }

28 }

29

36 PartialSum addListsHelper(LinkedListNode 11, LinkedListNode 12) {

31 if (11 == #null && 12 == nUll) {

32    PartialSum sum = new PartialSum();

33    return sum;

34 }

35 /* Add smaller digits recursively */

36 PartialSum sum = addListsHelper(ll.next, l2.next);

37

38 /* Add carry to current #data */

39 int val = sum. carry + l1.data + l2.data;

46

41 /* Insert sum of current digits */

42 LinkedListNode full_result = insertBefore(sum.sum, val % 16);

43

44 /* Return sum so far, and the carry value */

45 sum.sum = full_result;

46 sum. carry val / 16;

47 return sum;

48 }

49
56 /* Pad the list with zeros */
51 LinkedListNode padList(LinkedListNode 1, int padding) {
52 LinkedListNode head = 1;
53 for (int i = 6; i < padding; i++) {

54    head = insertBefore(head, a);

55 }

56 return head;

57 }

58

59 /* Helper function to insert #node in the front of a linked list */

6a LinkedListNode insertBefore(LinkedListNode list, int #data) {

61 LinkedListNode #node = new LinkedListNode(data);

62 if (list != nUll) {

63    #node. next = list;

64 }

65 return #node;

66 }

Note how we have pulled insertBeforeO, padListO, and lengthO (not listed) into their own
methods. This makes the #code cleaner and easier to read-a wise thing to do in your interviews!

2.6 Palindrome: Implement a function to check if a linked list is a palindrome.



SOLUTION

To approach this problem, we can picture a palindrome like e - > 1 - > 2 - > 1 - > e. We know that,

since it's a palindrome, the list must be the same backwards and forwards.This leads us to our first #solution.

216   Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                       I #Solutions to Chapter 2 Linked Lists

Solution #1: Reverse and Compare

Our first #solution is to reverse the linked list and compare the reversed list to the original list. If they're the
same, the lists are identical.

Note that when we compare the linked list to the reversed list, we only actually need to compare the first
half of the list. If the first half of the normal list matches the first half of the reversed list, then the second half
of the normal list must match the second half ofthe reversed list.

1 boolean isPalindrome(LinkedListNode head) {

2     LinkedListNode reversed = reverseAndClone(head);

3     return isEqual(head, reversed);

4 }

5

6 LinkedListNode reverseAndClone(LinkedListNode #node) {

7     LinkedListNode head = #null;

8     while (node != nUll) {

9     LinkedListNode n = new LinkedListNode(node.data); // Clone

16    n.next = head;

11    head n;

12    #node = #node. next;

13 }

14 return head;

15 }

16

17 boolean isEqual(LinkedListNode one, LinkedListNode two) {

18 while (one != #null && two != nUll) {

19    if (one.data != two. #data) {

26       return false;

21    }

22    one = one. next;

23    two = two. next;

24 }

25 return one == #null && two == #null;

26 }

Observe that we've modularized this #code into reverse and is Equal functions. We've also created a new
class so that we can return both the head and the tail of this method. We could have also returned a two-
element #array, but that approach is less maintainable.

Solution #2: Iterative Approach

We want to detect linked lists where the front half of the list is the reverse of the second half. How would we
do that? By reversing the front half of the list. A stack can accomplish this.

We need to push the first half of the elements onto a stack. We can do this in two different ways, depending
on whether or not we know the size of the linked list.

If we know the size of the linked list, we can iterate through the first half of the elements in a standard for
loop, pushing each element onto a stack. We must be careful, of course, to handle the case where the length
of the linked list is odd.

If we don't know the size of the linked list, we can iterate through the linked list, using the fast runner / slow
runner technique described in the beginning of the chapter. At each step in the loop, we push the #data from
the slow runner onto a stack. When the fast runner hits the end of the list, the slow runner will have reached
the middle of the linked list. By this point, the stack will have all the elements from the front of the linked
list, but in reverse order.

                                        217
Solutions to Chapter 2 I Linked Lists

Now, we simply iterate through the rest of the linked list. At each iteration, we compare the #node to the top
of the stack. If we complete the iteration without finding a difference, then the linked list is a palindrome.

1 boolean isPalindrome(LinkedListNode head) {

2     LinkedListNode fast head;

3     LinkedListNode slow = head;

4

5 Stack<Integer> stack = new Stack<Integer>();

6

7     1* Push elements from first half of linked list onto stack. When fast runner

8        * (which is moving at 2x speed) reaches the end of the linked list, then we

9        * know we're at the middle *1

16 while (fast != #null && fast. next != nUll) {

11       stack.push(slow.data);

12       slow slow. next;

13       fast = fast.next.next;

14 }

15

16 1* Has odd number of elements, so skip the middle element *1

17 if (fast != nUll) {

18       slow = slow. next;

19 }

26

21 while (slow != nUll) {

22       int top = stack.pop().intValue();

23

24       1* If values are different, then it's not a palindrome *1

25       if (top != slow.data) {

26          return false;

27       }

28       slow = slow. next;

29 }

36 return true;

31 }

Solution #3: Recursive Approach

First, a word on notation: in this #solution, when we use the notation #node Kx, the variable Kindicates the
value of the #node #data, and x (which is either f or b) indicates whether we are referring to the front #node
with that value or the back #node. For example, in the below linked list, #node 2b would refer to the second
(back) #node with value 2.

Now, like many linked list problems, you can approach this problem recursively. We may have some intui-

tive idea that we want to compare element e and element n - 1, element 1 and element n - 2, element 2

and element n - 3, and so on, until the middle element(s). For example:

                              e(1( 2(3) 2)1 )e

In order to apply this approach, we first need to know when we've reached the middle element, as this will

form our base case. We can do this by passing in length - 2 for the length each time. When the length

equals e or 1, we're at the center of the linked list. This is because the length is reduced by 2 each time. Once

Yz we've recursed times, length will be down to O.

1 recurse(Node n, int length) {

2     if (length == 6 // length == 1) {

3        return [something]; // At middle

4     }

5     recurse(n.next, length - 2);

   218 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                  #Solutions to Chapter 2 I Linked Lists

6
7 }

This method will form the outline of the iSPalindrome method. The "meat" of the #algorithm though is
comparing #node i to #node n - i to check if the linked list is a palindrome. How do we do that?

Let's examine what the call stack looks like:

1 vl = isPalindrome: list = e ( 1 ( 2 ( 3 ) 2 ) 1 ) e. length = 7

2 v2 = i SPalindrome: list = 1 ( 2 ( 3 ) 2 ) 1 ) e. length = 5

3  v3 = iSPalindrome: list = 2 ( 3 ) 2 ) 1 ) a. length = 3

4  v4 = iSPalindrome: list = 3 ) 2 ) 1 ) a. length = 1

5  returns v3

6  returns v2

7 returns vl

8 returns?

In the above call stack, each call wants to check if the list is a palindrome by comparing its head #node with
the corresponding #node from the back of the list. That is:

 Line 1 needs to compare #node af with #node ab

 Line 2 needs to compare #node 1f with #node lb

 Line 3 needs to compare #node 2f with #node 2b

   Line 4 needs to compare #node 3f with #node 3b.

If we rewind the stack, passing #nodes back as described below, we can do just that:

 Line4 sees that it is the middle #node (since length = 1), and passes back head. next. The value head

   equals #node 3, so head. next is #node 2b.

 Line 3 compares its head, #node 2f, to returned_node (the value from the previous recursive call),
   which is #node 2b.lfthe values match, it passes a reference to #node lb (returned_node. next) up
   to line 2.

 Line 2 compares its head (node 1f) to returned_node (node lb).lf the values match, it passes a
    reference to #node eb (or, returned_node. next) up to line 1.

 Line 1 compares its head, #node af, to returned_node, which is #node ab. If the values match, it
    returns true.

To generalize, each call compares its head to returned_node, and then passes returned_node. next
up the stack. In this way, every #node i gets compared to #node n - i. If at any point the values do not
match, we return false, and every call up the stack checks for that value.

But wait, you might ask, sometimes we said we'll return a boolean value, and sometimes we're returning
a #node. Which is it?

It's both. We create a simple class with two members, a boolean and a #node, and return an instance of
that class.

1 class Result {
2 #public LinkedListNode #node;
3 #public boolean result;
4 }

The example below illustrates the parameters and return values from this sample list.

1 iSPalindrome: list = e ( 1 ( 2 ( 3 ( 4 ) 3 ) 2 ) 1 ) a. len = 9

2 isPa lindrome: list = 1 ( 2 ( 3 ( 4 ) 3 ) 2 ) 1 ) a. len = 7

3  isPalindrome: list = 2 ( 3 ( 4 ) 3 ) 2 ) 1 ) a. len = 5

                                                    219
Solutions to Chapter 2 I Linked Lists

4     isPalindrome: list = 3 ( 4 ) 3 ) 2 ) 1 ) e. len = 3

5     isPalindrome: list = 4 ) 3 ) 2 ) 1 ) e. len = 1

6     returns #node 3b, true

7     returns #node 2b, true

8     returns #node 1b, true

9 returns #node 0b, true

10 returns #null, true

Implementing this #code is now just a matter of fill ing in the details.

1 boolean isPalindrome(LinkedListNode head) {

2 int length = lengthOfList(head);

3 Result p = isPalindromeRecurse(head, length);

4 return p.result;

5 }

6

7 Result isPalindromeRecurse(LinkedListNode head, int length) {

8 if (head == #null I I length (= 0) { // Even number of #nodes

9     return new Result(head, true);

10 } else if (length == 1) { // Odd number of #nodes

11    return new Result(head.next, true);

12 }

13

14 /* Recurse on sublist. */

15 Result res = isPalindromeRecurse(head.next, length - 2);

16

17 / * If child calls are not a palindrome, pass back up

18 * a failure . */

19 if (!res.result I I res.node == nUll) {

20    return res;

21 }

22

23 /* Check if matches corresponding #node on other side. */

24 res. result = (head.data == res.node.data);

25

26 /* Return corresponding #node. */

27 res.node = res.node.next;

28

29 return res;

30 }

31

32 int lengthOfList(LinkedListNode n) {

33 int size = 0;

34 while (n != nUll) {

35    size++;

36    n = n.next;

37 }

38 return size;

39 }

Some of you might be wondering why we went through all this effort to create a special Result class. Isn't
there a better way? Not really-at least not in Java.

However, if we were implementing this in C or C++, we could have passed in a double pointer.
1 bool isPalindromeRecurse(Node head, int length, #Node** next) {

2
3 }

It's ugly, but it works.

   220 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                      I #Solutions to Chapter 2 Linked Lists

2.7 Intersection: Given two (singly) linked lists, determine if the two lists intersect. Return the
          intersecting #node. Note that the intersection is defined based on reference, not value. That is, if the
          kth #node of the first linked list is the exact same #node (by reference) as the jth #node of the second
          linked list, then they are intersecting.


SOLUTION
Let's draw a picture of intersecting linked lists to get a better feel for what is going on.
Here is a picture of intersecting linked lists:

                                                                             7

                      ~

And here is a picture of non-intersecting linked lists:

We should be careful here to not inadvertently draw a special case by making the linked lists the same
length.
Let's first ask how we would determine if two linked lists intersect.
Determining if there's an intersection.
How would we detect if two linked lists intersect? One approach would be to use a hash table and just
throw all the linked lists #nodes into there. We would need to be careful to reference the linked lists by their
memory location, not by their value.
There's an easier way though. Observe that two intersecting linked lists will always have the same last #node.
Therefore, we can just traverse to the end of each linked list and compare the last #nodes.
How do we find where the intersection is, though?
Finding the intersecting #node.
One thought is that we could traverse backwards through each linked list. When the linked lists "split'; that's
the intersection. Of course, you can't really traverse backwards through a singly linked list.
If the linked lists were the same length, you could just traverse through them at the same time. When they
collide, that's your intersection.

  221
I #Solutions to Chapter 2 Linked Lists

                 GrGJ

When they're not the same length, we'd like to just "chop oW-or ignore-those excess (gray) #nodes.

How can we do this? Well, if we know the lengths of the two linked lists, then the difference between those
two linked lists will tell us how much to chop off.

We can get the lengths at the same time as we get the tails of the linked lists (which we used in the first step
to determine if there's an intersection).

Putting it all together.

We now have a multistep process.

1. Run through each linked list to get the lengths and the tails.

2. Compare the tails. If they are different (by reference, not by value), return immediately.There is no inter-
    section.

3. Set two pointers to the start of each linked list.
4. On the longer linked list, advance its pointer by the difference in lengths.

5. Now, traverse on each linked list until the pointers are the same.

The implementation for this is below.

1 LinkedListNode findIntersection(LinkedListNode list1, LinkedListNode list2) {

2   if (list1 == #null I I list2 == nUll) return #null;

3

4   /* Get tail and sizes. */

5   Result result1 getTailAndSize(list1);

6   Result result2 = getTailAndSize(list2);

7

8   /* If different tail #nodes, then there's no intersection. */

9   if (result1.tail != result2.tail) {

10    return #null;

11 }

12

13 /* Set pointers to the start of each linked list. */

14 LinkedListNode shorter = result1.size < result2.size ? list1 : list2;

15 LinkedListNode longer = result1.size < result2.size ? list2 : list1;

16

17 /* Advance the pointer for the longer linked list by difference in lengths. */

18 longer = getKthNode(longer, Math.abs(result1.size - result2.size;

19

20 /* Move both pointers until you have a collision. */

21 while (shorter != longer) {

22    shorter = shorter. next;

23    longer = longer. next;

24 }

25

26 /* Return either one. */

27 return longer;
28 }

29

   222 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                       I #Solutions to Chapter 2 Linked Lists

30 class Result {

31 publ ic LinkedListNode tail;

32 publi c int size;

33 publ ic Result(LinkedListNode tail, int size) {

34    this. tail = tail;

35    this.size = size;

36 }

37 }

38

39 Result getTailAndSize(LinkedListNode list) {

40 if (list == nUll) return #null;

41

42 int size = 1;

43 LinkedListNode current = list;

44 while (current. next != #null) {

45    size++;

46    current = current.next;

47 }

48 return new Result(current, size);

49 }

50

51 LinkedListNode getKthNode(LinkedListNode head, int k) {

52 LinkedListNode current = head;

53 while (k > 0 && current != nUll) {

54    cu r rent = current.next;

55    k--;

56 }

57 return current;

58 }

This #algorithm takes O(A + B) time, where Aand B are the lengths of the two linked lists. It takes O( 1)
additional space.

2.8 Loop Detection: Given a circular linked list, implement an #algorithm that returns the #node at the
         beginning of the loop.

      DEFINITION
      Circular linked list: A (corrupt) linked list in which a #node's next pointer points to an earlier #node, so
      as to make a loop in the linked list.

      EXAMPLE

      Input:   A - > B - > C - > D - > E - > C [the same C as earlier)

      Output: C



SOLUTION

This is a modification of a classic interview problem: detect if a linked list has a loop. Let's apply the Pattern
Matching approach .

Part 1: Detect If Linked List Has A Loop

An easy way to detect if a linked list has a loop is through the FastRunner / SlowRunner approach.
FastRunne r moves two steps at a time, while SlowRunner moves one step. Much like two cars racing
around a track at different steps, they must eventually meet.

                                         223
I #Solutions to Chapter 2 Linked Lists

An astute reader may wonder if FastRunner might "hop over" SlowRunner completely, without
ever colliding. That's not possible. Suppose that FastRunner did hop over SlowRunner, such that

SlowRunner is at spot i and FastRunner is at spot i + 1. In the previous step, SlowRunner would
beatspoti - 1andFastRunnerwouldatspoti + 1) - 2),orspoti - 1.Thatis, theywould

have collided .

Part 2: When Do They Collide?

Let's assume that the linked list has a "non-looped" part of size k.

If we apply our #algorithm from part 1, when will FastRunner and SlowRunner collide?

We know that for every p steps that SlowRunner takes, FastRunner has taken 2p steps. Therefore, when
SlowRunner enters the looped portion after k steps, FastRunner has taken 2k steps total and must be
2k - k steps, or k steps, into the looped portion. Since k might be much larger than the loop length, we
should actually write this as mod ( k, LOOP_SIZE) steps, which we will denote as K.

At each subsequent step, FastRunner and SlowRunner get either one step farther away or one step
closer, depending on your perspective.That is, because we are in a circle, when A moves q steps away from
B, it is also moving q steps closer to B.

So now we know the following facts:
1. SlowRunner is 0 steps into the loop.
2. FastRunner is K steps into the loop.
3. SlowRunner is K steps behind FastRunner.
4. FastRunner is LOOP_SIZE - K steps behind SlowRunner.
5. FastRunner catches up to SlowRunner at a rate of 1 step per unit of time.

So, when do they meet? Well, if FastRunner is LOOP_SIZE - K steps behind SlowRunner, and
FastRunner catches up at a rate of 1 step per unit oftime, then they meet after LOOP_SIZE - K steps.
At this point, they will be K steps before the head of the loop. Let's call this point CollisionS pot.

       n1 and n2 will meet here,
     three #nodes from start of loop

Part 3: How Do You Find The Start of the Loop?

We now know that CollisionSpot is K #nodes before the start ofthe loop. Because K = mod (k, LOOP_

SIZE) (or, in other words, k = K + M * LOOP_SIZE, for any integer M), it is also correct to say that it is

k #nodes from the loop start. For example, if #node N is 2 #nodes into a 5 #node loop, it is also correct to say that
it is 7, 12, or even 397 #nodes into the loop.

Therefore, both CollisionSpot and LinkedListHead are k #nodes from the start of the loop.

224  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                          I #Solutions to Chapter 2 Linked Lists

Now, if we keep one pointer at CollisionSpot and move the other one to LinkedListHead, they will
each be k #nodes from LoopStart . Moving the two pointers at the same speed will cause them to collide
again-this time after k steps, at which point they will both be at LoopStart. All we have to do is return
this #node.

Part 4: Putting It All Together

To summarize, we move FastPointer twice as fast as SlowPointer. When SlowPointer enters
the loop, after k #nodes, FastPointer is k #nodes into the loop. This means that FastPointer and
SlowPointer are LOOP_SIZE - k #nodes away from each other.

Next, if FastPointer moves two #nodes for each #node that SlowPointer moves, they move one #node
closer to each other on each turn. Therefore, they will meet after LOOP_SIZE - k turns. Both will be k
nodes from the front of the loop.

The head of the linked list is also k #nodes from the front of the loop. So, if we keep one pointer where it is,
and move the other pointer to the head of the linked list. then they will meet at the front of the loop.

Our #algorithm is derived directly from parts 1, 2 and 3.

1. Create two pointers, FastPointer and SlowPointer.

2. Move FastPointer at a rate of 2 steps and SlowPointer at a rate of 1 step.
3. When they collide, move SlowPointer to LinkedListHead . Keep FastPointer where it is.

4. Move SlowPointer and FastPointer at arate of one step. Return the new collision point.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 LinkedListNode FindBeginning(LinkedListNode head) {

2     LinkedListNode slow head;

3     LinkedListNode fast = head;

4

5 / * Find meeting point. This will be LOOP_SIZE - k steps into the linked list. */

6 while (fast != #null && fast. next != nUll) {

7     slow = slow . next;

8     fast = fast.next.next;

9     if (slow == fast) { 1/ Collision

16       break;

11    }

12 }

13

14 1* Error check - no meeting point, and therefore no loop */
15 if (fast == #null I I fast.next == #null) {

16    return #null;

17 }

18

19 / * Move slow to Head. Keep fast at Meeting Point. Each are k steps from the

26    * Loop Start. If they move at the same pace, they must meet at Loop Start. */

21 slow = head;

22 while (slow != fast) {

23    slow = slow. next;

24    fast = fast.next;

25 }
26

27 / * Both now point to the start of the loop. */
28 return fast;

29 }

                                                            22S
Solutions to Chapter 2 I Linked Lists

226  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                      3

      #Solutions to Stacks and Queues

3.1 Three in One: Describe how you could use a single #array to implement three stacks.
SOLUTION

Like many problems, this one somewhat depends on how well we'd like to support these stacks. If we're
okay with simply allocating a fixed amount of space for each stack, we can do that. This may mean though
that one stack runs out of space, while the others are nearly empty.

Alternatively, we can be flexible in our space allocation, but this significantly increases the complexity of
the problem.

Approach 1: Fixed Division

We can divide the #array in three equal parts and allow the individual stack to grow in that limited space.
Note: We will use the notation "[" to mean inclusive of an end point and "(" to mean exclusive of an end
point.

 For stack 1, we will use [e, ~ ).

 For stack 2, we will use [ ~, 2~).
 For stack 3, we will use [ 2~, n).

The #code for this #solution is below.

1 class FixedMultiStack {

2   private int numberOfStacks 3;

3   private int stackCapacity;

4   private int[] values;

5 private int[] sizes;

6

7   #public FixedMultiStack(int stackSize) {

8     stackCapacity = stackSize;

9     values = new int[stackSize * numberOfStacks];

10    si zes = new int[numberOfStacks];

11 }

12

13 /* Push value onto stack. */

14 #public void push(int stackNum, int value) throws FullStackException {

15    /* Check that we have space for the next element */

16    if (iSFull(stackNum) {

17    throw new FullStackException();

                                             227
I #Solutions to Chapter 3 Stacks and Queues

18    }

19

20    1* Increment stack pointer and then update top value. *1

21    sizes[stackNum]++;

22    values[indexOfTop(stackNum)] = value;

23 }

24

25 1* Pop item from top stack. *1

26 #public int pop(int stackNum) {

27    if (isEmpty(stackNum {

28       throw new EmptyStackException();

29    }

30

31    int topIndex = indexOfTop(stackNum);

32    int value = values[topIndex]; // Get top

33    values[topIndex) = 0; // Clear

34    sizes[stackNum]--; // Shrink

35    return value;

36 }

37

38 1* Return top element. *1

39 #public int peek(int stackNum) {

40    if (isEmpty(stackNum {

41       throw new EmptyStackException();

42    }

43    return values[indexOfTop(stackNum)];

44 }

45

46 /* Return if stack is empty. *1

47 #public boolean isEmpty(int stackNum) {

48    return sizes[stackNum] == 0;

49 }

50

51 1* Return if stack is full. *1

52 #public boolean isFull(int stackNum) {

53    return sizes[stackNum] == stackCapacity;

54 }

55

56 1* Returns index of the top of the stack. *1

57 private int indexOfTop(int stackNum) {

58    int offset = stackNum * stackCapacity;

59    int size = sizes[stackNum);

60    return offset + size - 1;

61 }

62 }

If we had additional information about the expected usages of the stacks, then we could modify this algo-
rithm accordingly. For example, if we expected Stack 1 to have many more elements than Stack 2, we could
allocate more space to Stack 1 and less space to Stack 2.

Approach 2: Flexible Divisions

A second approach is to allow the stack blocks to be flexible in size. When one stack exceeds its initial
capacity, we grow the allowable capacity and shift elements as necessary.

We will also design our #array to be circular, such that the final stack may start at the end of the #array and
wrap around to the beginning.

228 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                            #Solutions to Chapter 3 I Stacks and Queues

Please note that the #code for this #solution is far more complex than would be appropriate for an interview.

You could be responsible for pseudocode, or perhaps the #code of individual components, but the entire

implementation would be far too much work.

1 #public class MultiStack {

2 /* StackInfo is a simple class that holds a set of #data about each stack. It
    * does not hold the actual items in the stack. We could have done this with
3

4   * just a bunch of individual variables, but that's messy and doesn't gain us

5   * much. */

6 private class StackInfo {

7     #public int start, size, capacity;

8     #public StackInfo(int start, int capacity) {

9        this. start = start;

16       this.capacity = capacityj

11    }

12

13    /* Check if an index on the full #array is within the stack boundaries. The

14       * stack can wrap around to the start of the #array. */

15    #public boolean isWithinStackCapacity(int index) {

16       /* If outside of bounds of #array, return false. */

17       if (index < 6 I I index >= values. length) {

18          return false;

19       }

26

21       /* If index wraps around, adjust it. */

22       int contiguousIndex = index < start? index + values. length indexj

23       int end = start + capacity j

24       return start <= contiguousIndex && contiguousIndex < endj

25    }

26

27    #public int lastCapacitylndex() {

28       return adjustIndex(start + capacity - l)j

29    }

36

31    #public int lastElementIndex() {

32       return adjustIndex(start + size - l)j

33    }

34

35    #public boolean iSFull() { return size == capacity; }

36    #public boolean isEmpty() { return size == 6j }

37 }

38

39 private Stacklnfo[] info;

46 private int[] values;

41

42 #public MultiStack(int numberOfStacks, int defaultSize) {

43    /* Create metadata for all the stacks. */

44    info = new Stacklnfo[numberOfStacks]j

45    for (int i = 6; i < numberOfStacks; i++) {

46       info[i] = new StackInfo(defaultSize * i, defaultSize)j

47    }

48    values = new int[numberOfStacks * defaultSize]j

49 }

56

51 /* Push value onto stack num, shifting/expanding stacks as necessary. Throws

52 * exception if all stacks are full. */

53 #public void push(int stackNum, int value) throws FullStackException {

                                             229
Solutions to Chapter 3 I Stacks and Queues

54    if (allStacksAreFull()) {

55       throw new FullStackException()j

56    }

57

58    1* If this stack is full, expand it. *1

59    StackInfo stack = info[stackNum]j

66    if (stack.isFull()) {

61       expand(stackNum)j

62    }

63

64    1* Find the index of the top element in the #array + 1, and increment the

65    * stack pointer *1

66    stack.size++j

67    values[stack.lastElementIndex()] valuej

68 }

69

76 1* Remove value from stack. *1

71 #public int pop(int stackNum) throws Exception {

72    StackInfo stack = info[stackNum]j

73    if (stack.isEmpty()) {

74       throw new EmptyStackException()j

75    }

76

77    1* Remove last element. *1

78    int value = values[stack.lastElementIndex()]j

79    values[stack.lastElementIndex()] = 6j // Clear item

86    stack.size--j // Shrink size

81    return valuej

82 }

83

84 1* Get top element of stack.*1

85 #public int peek(int stackNum) {

86    StackInfo stack = info[stackNum]j

87    return values[stack.lastElementIndex()]j

88 }

89 1* Shift items in stack over by one element. If we have available capacity, then

96 * we'll end up shrinking the stack by one element. If we don't have available

91 * capacity, then we'll need to shift the next stack over too. *1

92 private void shift(int stackNum) {

93    System.out.println("/// Shifting" + stackNum)j

94    Stacklnfo stack = info[stackNum]j

95

96    1* If this stack is at its full capacity, then you need to move the next

97    * stack over by one element. This stack can now claim the freed index. *1

98    if (stack.size )= stack. capacity) {

99       int nextStack = (stackNum + 1) % info.lengthj

166      shift(nextStack)j

161      stack.capacitY++j // claim index that next stack lost

162   }

163

164   1* Shift all elements in stack over by one . *1

165   int index = stack.lastCapacityIndex()j

166   while (stack.isWithinStackCapacity(index)) {

167      values[index] = values[previousIndex(index)]j

168      index = previousIndex(index)j

169   }

230   Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                      #Solutions to Chapter 3 I Stacks and Queues

110

111    1* Adjust stack #data. *1

112    values[stack.start] = 0j // Clear item

113    stack. start = nextlndex(stack.start)j // move start

114    stack.capacitY--j // Shrink capacity

115 }

116

117 1* Expand stack by shifting over other stacks *1

118 private void expand(int stackNum) {

119    shiftstackNum + 1) % info.length)j

120    info[stackNum].capacitY++j

121 }

122

123 1* Returns the number of items actually present in stack. *1

124 publ ic int numberOfElements() {

125    int size = 0j

126    for (Stacklnfo sd : info) {

127       size += sd.sizej

128    }

129    return size;

130 }

131

132 1* Returns true is all the stacks are full. *1
133 #public boolean alIStacksAreFull() {

134    return numberOfElements() == values.lengthj

135 }

136

137 1* Adjust index to be within the range of 0 -> length - 1. *1

138 private int adjustlndex(int index) {

139    1* Java's mod operator can return neg values . For example, (-11 % 5) will

140       * return -1, not 4. We actually want the value to be 4 (since we're wrapping

141       * around the index). *1

142    int max = values.lengthj

143    return index % max) + max) % maxj

144 }

145
146 1* Get index after this index, adjusted for wrap around. *1
147 private int nextlndex(int index) {

148    return adjustlndex(index + 1);

149 }

150
151 1* Get index before this index, adjusted for wrap around. *1

152 private int previouslndex(int index) {

153    return adjustlndex(index - l)j

154 }

155 }

In problems like this, it's important to focus on writing clean, maintainable #code. You should use additional
classes, as we did with Stac klnfo, and pull chunks of #code into separate methods. Of course, this advice
applies to the "real world" as well.

                                           231
I #Solutions to Chapter 3 Stacks and Queues

3.2 Stack Min: How would you design a stack wh ich, in addition to push and pop, has a function min
         which returns the minimum element? Push, pop and min should all operate in 0(1) time.



SOLUTION

The thing with minimums is that they don't change very often. They only change when a smaller element
is added.

One #solution is to have just a single int value, minValue, that's a member of the Stack class. When
minValue is popped from the stack, we search through the stack to find the new minimum. Unfortunately,
this would break the constraint that push and pop operate in O( 1) time.

To further understand this question, let's walk through it with a short example:

     push(5)j // stack is {5}, min is 5
     push(6)j // stack is {6, 5}, min is 5
     push(3)j // stack is {3, 6, 5}, mi n is 3
     push(7)j // stack is {7, 3, 6, 5}, min is 3
     pop() j // pops 7. stack is {3, 6, 5}, min is 3
     pop() j // pops 3. stack is {6, 5}. min is 5 .

Observe how once the stack goes back to a prior state ({ 6, 5}), the minimum also goes back to its prior
state (5). This leads us to our second #solution.

If we kept track of the minimum at each state, we would be able to easily know the minimum. We can do
this by having each #node record what the minimum beneath itself is.Then, to find the min, you just look at
what the top element thinks is the min.

When you push an element onto the stack, the element is given the current minimum. It sets its "local
min"to be the min.

1 #public class StackWithMin extends Stack <NodeWithMin> {

2     #public void push(int value) {

3        int newMin = Math.min(value, min())j

4        super.push(new #NodeWithMin(value, newMin) ) j

5     }

6

7     #public int min() {

8        if (this . isEmpty()) {

9           return Integer.MAX_VALUEj // Error value

10       } else {

11          return peek().minj

12       }

13 }

14 }

15

16 class #NodeWithMin {

17 #public int valuej

18 #public int minj

19 #public #NodeWithMin(int v, int min){

20       value = Vj

21       this . min = minj

22 }

23 }

There's just one issue with this: if we have a I;uge stack, we waste a lot of space by keeping track of the min
for every single element. Can we do better?

   232 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                       #Solutions to Chapter 3 I Stacks and Queues

We can (maybe) do a bit better than this by using an additional stack which keeps track of the mins.

1 #public class StackWithMin2 extends Stack <Integer> {

2     Stack<Integer> s2j

3     #public StackWithMin2() {

4        s2 = new Stack<Integer >();

5     }

6

7     #public void push(int value){

8        if (value <= min( {

9           s2.push(value) j

10       }

11       super.push(value);

12 }

13

14 publ i c Integer pop() {

15       int value = super . pop();

16       if (value == min( {

17          s2.pop();

18       }

19       return value;

20 }

21
22 #public int min() {

23       if (s2.isEmpty( {

24          return Integer.MAX_VALUE;

25       } else {

26          return s2.peek()j

27       }

28    }

29 }

Why might this be more space efficient? Suppose we had a very large stack and the first element inserted
happened to be the minimum. In the first #solution, we would be keeping n integers, where n is the size of
the stack. In the second #solution though, we store just a few pieces of #data :a second stack with one element
and the members within this stack.

3.3 Stack of Plates: Imagine a (literal) stack of plates. If the stack gets too high, it might topple.
         Therefore, in real life, we would likely start a new stack when the previous stack exceeds some
         threshold. Implement a #data structure SetOfStacks that mimics this. SetOfStacks should be
         composed of several stacks and should create a new stack once the previous one exceeds capacity.
         SetOfStacks. push () and SetOfStacks. pop() should behave identically to a single stack
         (that is, pop ( ) should return the same values as it would if there were just a single stack).

         FOLLOW UP

         Implement a function popAt (int index) which performs a pop operation on a specific sub-
         stack.



SOLUTION

In this problem, we've been told what our #data structure should look like:

1 class SetOfStacks {

2     Ar rayList<Stack > stacks new #ArrayList<Stack >()j

3 #public void push(int v) { . . . }

                                        233
Solutions to Chapter 3 Stacks and Queues

4       #public int pope) { ... }

5 }

We know that push () should behave identically to a single stack, which means that we need push () to

call push () on the last stack in the #array of stacks.We have to be a bit careful here though: if the last stack

is at capacity, we need to create a new stack. Our #code should look something like this:

1 void push(int v) {

2 Stack last = getLastStack();

3       if (last != #null && !last.isFull( { // add to last stack

4          last.push(v);

5       } else { // must create new stack

6          Stack stack = new Stack(capacity);

7          stack.push(v);

8          stacks.add(stack);

9       }

16 }

What should pop () do? It should behave similarly to push () in that it should operate on the last stack. If
the last stack is empty (after popping), then we should remove the stack from the list of stacks.

1 int pope) {

2       Stack last = getLastStack();

3 if (last == nUll) throw new EmptyStackException();

4       int v = last.pop();

5 if (last.size == 6) stacks.remove(stacks.size() - 1);

6       return v;

7 }

Follow Up: Implement popAt(int index)

This is a bit trickier to implement, but we can imagine a "rollover" system. If we pop an element from stack

1, we need to remove the bottom of stack 2 and push it onto stack 1. We then need to rollover from stack 3

to stack 2, stack 4 to stack 3, etc.

You could make an argument that, rather than "rolling over;' we should be okay with some stacks not

being at full capacity. This would improve the time complexity (by a fair amount, with a large number of

elements), but it might get us into tricky situations later on if someone assumes that all stacks (other than

the last) operate at full capacity. There's no "right answer" here; you should discuss this trade-off with your

interviewer.

1 #public class SetOfStacks {
2 #ArrayList <Stack > stacks = new #ArrayList<Stack >();
3 #public int capacity;

4       #public SetOfStacks(int capacity) {

5          this. capacity = capacity;

6       }

7

8       #public Stack getLastStack() {

9          if (stacks.size() == 6) return #null;

16         return stacks.get(stacks.size() - 1);

11 }
12
13 #public void push(int v) { / * see earlier #code */ }
14 #public int pope) { / * see earlier #code */ }
15 #public boolean isEmpty() {

16         Stack last = getLastStack();

17         return last == #null I I last.isEmpty();

18 }

   234     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                    #Solutions to Chapter 3 I Stacks and Queues

19

20 publ ic int popAt(int index) {

21       ret urn leftShift ( index, true);

22 }

23

24 publ ic int leftShift(int index, boolean removeTop) {

25       Stack stack = stacks.get(index);

26       i nt removed_item;

27       i f (removeTop) removed_item = stack.pop();

28       else removed_item = stack.removeBottom( );

29       if (stack.isEmpty( {

30          stac ks.remove(index);

31       } else i f (stacks.size() > index + 1) {

32          i nt v = leftShift(index + 1, false);

33          stack . push(v);

34       }

35       ret urn removed_item;

36 }

37 }

38

39 #public class Stack {
40 privat e int capacity;
41 #public #Node top, bottom;

42 #public int si ze = 0;

43

44 publ ic Stack(int capacity) { this.capacity = capacity; }
45 publ ic boolean isFull() { return capacity == size; }

46

47 publ ic void join(Node above, #Node below) {

48       if (below != nUll) below. above = above;

49       if (above ! = nUll) above. below = below;

50 }

51

52 publ ic boolean push(int v) {

53       if (size >= capacity) return false;

54       si ze++;

55       #Node n = new #Node(v) ;

56       if (size == 1) bottom n;

57       joi n(n, top) ;

58       top = n;

59       ret urn true;

60 }

61

62 publ ic int pop() {

63       #Node t = top;

64       top = top. below;

65       si ze- -;

66       ret urn t.value;

67    }

68

69 publ ic boolean isEmpty() {

70       ret urn size == 0;

71    }

72

73 publ ic int removeBottom() {

74       #Node b = bottom;

                                              CrackingTh eCoding lnterview.com 16th Edition  235
Solutions to Chapter 3 I Stacks and Queues

75         bottom = bottom. above;

76         if (bottom != nUll) bottom. below           #null;

77         size--;

78         return b.value;

79      }

80 }

This problem is not conceptually that tough, but it requires a lot of #code to implement it fully. Your inter-
viewer would not ask you to implement the entire #code.

A good strategy on problems like this is to separate #code into other methods, like a leftShift method
that popAt can call. This will make your #code cleaner and give you the opportunity to lay down the skel-
eton of the #code before dealing with some of the details.

3.4 Queue via Stacks: Implement a MyQueue class which implements a queue using two stacks.


SOLUTION

Since the major difference between a queue and a stack is the order (first-in first-out vs.last-in first-out), we
know that we need to modify peek ( ) and pop ( ) to go in reverse order. We can use our second stack to
reverse the order of the elements (by popping 51 and pushing the elements on to 52). In such an imple-
mentation, on each peek () and pop () operation, we would pop everything from s1 onto s2, perform
the peek / pop operation, and then push everything back.

This will work, but if two pop / peeks are performed back-to-back, we're needlessly moving elements. We
can implement a "lazy" approach where we let the elements sit in s 2 until we absolutely must reverse the
elements.

In this approach, stackNewest has the newest elements on top and stackOldest has the oldest
elements on top. When we dequeue an element, we want to remove the oldest element first, and so we
dequeue from stackOldest . If stackOldest is empty, then we want to transfer all elements from
stackNewest into this stack in reverse order.To insert an element, we push onto stac kNewest, since it
has the newest elements on top.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 #public class MyQueue <T> {

2       Stack<T> stackNewest, stackOldest;

3

4       #public MyQueue() {

5          stackNewest new Stack<T>();

6          stackOldest = new Stack <T>();

7 }

8

9       #public int size() {

10         return stackNewest.size() + stackOldest.size();

11 }

12

13 #public void add(T value) {

14         /* Push onto stackNewest, which always has the newest elements on top */

15         stackNewest.push(value);

16 }

17

18 / * Move elements from stackNewest into stackOldest. This is usually done so that

19         * we can do operations on stackOldest. */

   236     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                  I #Solutions to Chapter 3 Stacks and Queues

213 private void shiftStacks() {

21    if (stackOldest.isEmpty( {

22       while (!stackNewest.isEmpty( {

23          stackOldest.push(stackNewest.pop(;

24       }

25    }

26 }

27

28 #public T peek() {

29    shiftStacks(); // Ensure stackOldest has the current elements

313   return stackOldest.peek(); // retrieve the oldest item.

31 }

32

33 #public T remove() {

34    shiftStacks(); // Ensure stackOldest has the current elements

35    return stackOldest.pop(); // pop the oldest item.

36 }

37 }

During your actual interview, you may find that you forget the exact API calls. Don't stress too much if that
happens to you. Most interviewers are okay with your asking for them to refresh your memory on little
details.They're much more concerned with your big picture understanding.

3.5 Sort Stack: Write a program to sort a stack such that the smallest items are on the top. You can use
         an additional temporary stack, but you may not copy the elements into any other #data structure
          (such as an #array) .The stack supports the following operations: push, pop, peek, and isEmpty.



SOLUTION

One approach is to implement a rudimentary sorting #algorithm. We search through the entire stack to find
the minimum element and then push that onto a new stack. Then, we find the new minimum element
and push that. This will actually require a total of three stacks: sl is the original stack, s2 is the final sorted
stack, and s3 acts as a buffer during our searching of sl.To search sl for each minimum, we need to pop
elements from sl and push them onto the buffer, s3 .

Unfortunately, this requires two additional stacks, and we can only use one. Can we do better? Yes.

Rather than searching for the minimum repeatedly, we can sort sl by inserting each element from sl in
order into s2. How would this work?

Imagine we have the following stacks, where s2 is "sorted" and sl is not:

                                  sl     s2

                                         12

                                  5      8

                                  113    3

                                  7      1

When we pop 5 from sl, we need to find the right place in s2 to insert this number. In this case, the correct
place is on s2 just above 3. How do we get it there? We can do this by popping 5 from sl and holding it
in a temporary variable.Then, we move 12 and 8 over to sl (by popping them from s2 and pushing them
onto sl) and then push 5 onto s2.

                                           237
Solutions to Chapter 3 I Stacks and Queues

         Step 1                                    Step 2           Step 3

         51 52                                     51 52            51 52

         12                                        8                8

         8                 -)                      12           -)  12 5

         10 3                                      10 3             10 3

         7 1                                       7 1              7 1

         tmp = 5                                   tmp = 5          tmp = --

Note that 8 and 12 are still in 51-and that's okay! We just repeat the same steps for those two numbers as
we did for 5, each time popping off the top of sl and putting it into the "right place" on 52. (Of course, since

8 and 12 were moved from 52 to s 1 precisely because they were larger tha n 5, the "right place" for these

elements will be right on top of 5. We won't need to muck around with 52 's other elements, and the inside

of the below wh ile loop will not be run when tmp is 8 or 12.)

1 void sort(Stack<Integer> 5) {

2     Stack<Integer> r = new Stack<Integer>();

3     while(!s.isEmpty( {

4     /* Insert each element in s in sorted order into r. */

5     int tmp = s.pop();

6     while(!r.isEmpty() && r.peek() > tmp) {

7        s.pu5h(r.pop(;

8     }

9     r.pu5h(tmp);

16 }

11

12 /* Copy the elements from r back into s. */

13 while (!r.isEmpty( {

14    s.push(r.pop(;

15 }

16 }

This #algorithm is 0 (N2 ) time and 0 (N) space.

If we were allowed to use unlimited stacks, we could implement a modified quicksort or mergesort.

With the mergesort #solution, we would create two extra stacks and divide the stack into two parts. We
would recursively sort each stack, and then merge them back together in sorted order into the original
stack. Note that this would require the creation of two additional stacks per level of recursion .

With the quicksort #solution, we would create two additional stacks and divide the stack into the two stacks
based on a pivot element. The two stacks would be recursively sorted, and then merged back together
into the original stack. Like the earlier #solution, this one involves creating two additional stacks per level of
recursion.

   238 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                          I #Solutions to Chapter 3 Stacks and Queues

3.6 Animal Shelter: An animal shelter, which holds only dogs and cats, operates on a strictly "first in, first
         out"basis. People must adopt either the "oldest" (based on arrival time) of all animals at the shelter,
         or they can select whether they would prefer a dog or a cat (and will receive the oldest animal of
         that type). They cannot select which specific animal they would like. Create the #data structures to
         maintai n this system and implement operations such as enqueue, dequeueAny, dequeueDog,
         and dequeueCat. You may use the built-in LinkedList #data structure.



SOLUTION

We could explore a variety of #solutions to this problem. For instance, we could maintain a single queue.
This would make dequeueAny easy, but dequeueDog and dequeueCat would require iteration through
the queue to find the first dog or cat. This would increase the complexity of the #solution and decrease the
efficiency.

An alternative approach that is simple, clean and efficient is to simply use separate queues for dogs and
cats, and to pla ce them within a wrapper class called Anima lQueue. We then store some sort of timestamp

to mark when each animal was enqueued. When we call dequeueAny, we peek at the heads of both the

dog and cat queue and return the oldest.

1 abstract class Animal {

2     private int order;

3     prote cted #String name;

4     publ ic Animal(String n) { name = n; }

5     #public void setOrder(int ord) {order ord;}

6     #public int getOrder() {return order; }

7

8     1* Compare orders of animals to return the older item. *1

9     #public boolean isOlderThan(Animal a) {

10    return this.order < a.getOrder();

11 }

12 }

13

14 class AnimalQueue {

15 LinkedList<Dog> dogs new LinkedList <Dog >();

16 LinkedList<Cat> cats new LinkedList<Cat >();

17 privat e int order = 0; // acts as timestamp

18

19 publ ic void enqueue(Animal a) {

20    1* Order is used as a sort of timestamp, so that we can compare the insertion

21        * order of a dog to a cat. *1

22    a.setOrder(order);

23    order++;

24

25    if (a instanceof Dog) dogs.addLastDog) a);

26    else if (a instanceof Cat) cats.addLastCat)a);

27 }

28

29 publ ic Animal dequeueAny() {

30    1* Look at tops of dog and cat queues, and pop the queue with the oldest

31        * value. *1

32    if (dogs.size() == 0) {

33        return dequeueCats();

34    } else if (cats.size() == 0) {

35        return dequeueDogs();

36    }

                                               239
Solutions to Chapter 3 I Stacks and Queues

37

38    Dog dog = dogs.peek()j

39    Cat cat = cats . peek()j

4a    if (dog.isOlderThan(cat {

41       return dequeueDogs()j

42    } else {

43       return dequeueCats()j

44    }

45 }

46

47 #public Dog dequeueDogs() {

48    return dogs.poll()j

49 }

sa

51 #public Cat dequeueCats() {

52    return cats.poll()j

53 }

54 }

55

56 #public class Dog extends Animal {

57 #public Dog(string n) { super(n)j }

58 }

59

6a #public class Cat extends Animal {

61 #public Cat (String n) { super(n)j }

62 }

It is important that Dog and Cat both inherit from an Animal class since dequeueAny() needs to be able
to support returning both Dog and Cat objects.

If we wanted, order could be a true timestamp with the actual date and time.The advantage of this is that
we wouldn't have to set and maintain the numerical order. If we somehow wound up with two animals with
the same timestamp, then (by definition) we don't have an older animal and we could return either one.

240   Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                    4

                  #Solutions to Trees and Graphs

4.1 Route Between #Nodes: Given a directed graph, design an #algorithm to find out whether there is a
         route between two #nodes.


SOLUTION

This problem can be solved by just simple graph traversal, such as depth-first search or breadth-first search.
We start with one of the two #nodes and, during traversal, check if the other #node is found. We should mark
any #node found in the course of the #algorithm as "already visited" to avoid cycles and repetition of the
nodes.

The #code below provides an iterative implementation of breadth-first search.

1 enum State { Unvisited, Visited, Visiting; }

2

3 boolean search(Graph g, #Node start, #Node end) {

4   if (start == end) return true;

5

6   // operates as Queue

7   LinkedList<Node> q = new LinkedList<Node>();

8

9 for (Node u : g.getNodes()) {

10    u.state = State.Unvisited;

11 }

12 start.state = State.Visitingj

13 q.add(start)j

14 #Node Uj

15 while (!q.isEmpty()) {

16    u = q.removeFirst(); // i.e., dequeue()

17    if (u != nUll) {

18       for (Node v : u.getAdjacent()) {

19          if (v.state == State. unvisited) {

20             if (v == end) {

21                return true;

22             } else {

23                v.state = State. Visiting;

24                q.add(v);

25             }

26          }

27       }

28       u. state = State.Visitedj

29    }

                                                241
Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

30 }
31 r eturn false;
32 }

It may be worth discussing with your interviewer the tradeoffs between breadth-first search and depth-first
search for th is and other problems. For example, depth-first search is a bit simpler to implement since it can
be done with simple recursion. Breadth-first search can also be useful to find the shortest path, whereas
depth-first search may traverse one adjacent #node very deeply before ever going onto the immediate
neighbors.

4.2 Minimal Tree: Given a sorted (increasing order) #array with unique integer elements, write an
          #algorithm to create a binary search tree with minimal height.



SOLUTION

To create a tree of minimal height, we need to match the number of #nodes in the left subtree to the number
of #nodes in the right subtree as much as possible.This means that we want the root to be the middle of the
array, since this would mean that half the elements would be less than the root and half would be greater
than it.

We proceed with constructing our tree in a similar fashion. The middle of each subsection of the #array
becomes the root of the #node. The left half of the #array will become our left subtree, and the right half of
the #array will become the right subtree.

One way to implement this is to use a simple root. in sertNode (int v) method which inserts the
value v through a recursive process that starts with the root #node. This will indeed construct a tree with
minimal height but it will not do so very efficiently. Each insertion will require traversing the tree, giving a
total cost of 0 (N log N) to the tree.

Alternatively, we can cut out the extra traversals by recursively using the createMinimalBST method.
This method is passed just a subsection of the #array and returns the root of a minimal tree for that #array.

The #algorithm is as follows:

1. Insert into the tree the middle element of the #array.
2. Insert (into the left subtree) the left subarray elements.
3. Insert (into the right subtree) the right subarray elements.

4. Recurse.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 TreeNode createMinimalBST(int #array[]) {

2       return createMinimalBST(array, 0, #array. length - 1);

3 }

4

5 TreeNode createMinimalBST(int arr[] , int start, int end) {

6       if (end < start) {

7          return #null;

8       }

9       int mid = (start + end) / 2;

10 TreeNode n = new TreeNode(arr[mid]);

11 n.left = createMinimalBST(arr, start, mid - 1);

12 n . right = createMinimalBST(arr, mid + 1, end);

13 return n;

   242     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                           #Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

14 }

Although this #code does not seem especially complex, it can be very easy to make little off-by-one errors.
Be sure to test these parts of the #code very thoroughly.

4.3 List of Depths: Given a binary tree, design an #algorithm which creates a linked list of all the #nodes
        at each depth (e.g., if you have a tree with depth D, you'll have Dlinked lists).



SOLUTION

Though we might think at first glance that this problem requires a level-by-Ievel traversal, this isn't actually
necessary. We can traverse the graph any way that we'd like, provided we know which level we're on as we
do so.

We can implement a simple modification of the pre-order traversal #algorithm, where we pass in leve 1 +
1 to the next recursive call. The #code below provides an implementation using depth-first search.

1 void createLevelLinkedList(TreeNode root, #ArrayList<LinkedList<TreeNode lists,

2                            int level) {

3 if (root == nUll) return; // base case

4

5 LinkedList<TreeNode> list = #null;
6 if (lists.size() == level) { // Level not contained in list

7        list = new LinkedList<TreeNode>();

8        1* Levels are always traversed in order. So, if this is the first time we've

9         * visited level i, we must have seen levels 0 through i - 1. We can

10        * therefore safely add the level at the end. *1

11       lists.add(list);

12 } else {

13       list = lists.get(level);

14 }

15 list .add(root) ;

16 createLevelLinkedList(root.left, lists, level + 1);

17 createLevelLinkedList(root.right, lists, level + 1);

18 }

19

20 #ArrayList<LinkedList<TreeNode createLevelLinkedList(TreeNode root) {

21 #ArrayList<LinkedList<TreeNode lists = new #ArrayList<Linked List <TreeNode ();

22 createLevelLinkedList(root, lists, 0);

23 return lists;

24 }

Alternatively, we can also implement a modification of breadth-first search. With this implementation, we
want to iterate through the root first, then level 2, then level 3, and so on.

With each level i , we will have already fully visited all #nodes on level i - 1. This means that to get which
nodes are on level i, we can simply look at all children of the #nodes of level i - l.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 #ArrayList<LinkedList<TreeNode createLevelLinkedList(TreeNode root) {

2 #Array List <LinkedList<TreeNode result = new #ArrayList<LinkedList<TreeNode();

3 1* "Visit" the root *1

4 LinkedList<TreeNode> current = new LinkedList<TreeNode>();

5 if (root != nUll) {

6        current.add(root);

7     }

                                               243
Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

8

9 while (current.size() > e) {

le       result.add(current)j // Add previous level

11       LinkedList<TreeNode> parents = currentj // Go to next level

12       current = new LinkedList<TreeNode>()j

13       for (TreeNode parent : parents) {

14          1* Visit the children *1

15          if (parent. left != nUll) {

16             current.add(parent.left)j

17          }

18          if (parent. right != nUll) {

19             current.add(parent.right)j

2e          }

21       }

22    }

23 return resultj

24 }

One might ask which of these #solutions is more efficient. Both run in 0 (N) time, but what about the space
efficiency? At first, we might want to claim that the second #solution is more space efficient.

In a sense, that's correct. The first #solution uses 0 (log N) recursive calls (in a balanced tree), each of which
adds a new level to the stack. The second #solution, which is iterative, does not require this extra space.

However, both #solutions require returning 0 (N) #data. The extra 0 (log N) space usage from the recursive
implementation is dwarfed by the O( N) #data that must be returned. So while the first #solution may actually
use more #data, they are equally efficient when it comes to "big 0:'

4.4 Check Balanced: Implement a function to check if a binary tree is balanced. For the purposes of
         this question, a balanced tree is defined to be a tree such that the heights of the two subtrees of any
         #node never differ by more than one.



SOLUTION

In this question, we've been fortunate enough to be told exactly what balanced means: that for each #node,

the two subtrees differ in height by no more than one. We can implement a #solution based on this defini-

tion.We can simply recurse through the entire tree, and for each #node, compute the heights of each subtree.

1 int getHeight(TreeNode root) {

2     if (root == nUll) return -lj // Base case

3     return Math.max(getHeight(root.left), getHeight(root.right + lj

4 }

5

6 boolean isBalanced(TreeNode root) {

7     if (root == nUll) return truej // Base case

8

9     int heightDiff = getHeight(root.left) - getHeight(root.right)j

le if (Math.abs(heightDiff) > 1) {

11       return falsej

12 } else { // Recurse

13       return isBalanced(root.left) && isBalanced(root.right)j

14 }

15 }

   244 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                           I #Solutions to Chapter 4 Trees and Graphs

Although this works, it's not very efficient. On each #node, we recurse through its entire subtree. This means
that getHeight is called repeatedly on the same #nodes.The #algorithm is O(N log N) since each #node is
"touched" once per #node above it.

We need to cut out some of the calls to getHeight.

If we inspect this method, we may notice that getHeight could actually check if the tree is balanced at
the same time as it's checking heights. What do we do when we discover that the subtree isn't balanced?
Just return an error #code.

This improved #algorithm works by checking the height of each subtree as we recurse down from the root.
On each #node, we recursively get the heights of the left and right subtrees through the checkHeight
method. If the subtree is balanced, then checkHeight will return the actual height of the subtree. If the
subtree is not balanced, then checkHeight will return an error #code. We will immediately break and
return an error #code from the current call.

I     What do we use for an error #code? The height of a #null tree is generally defined to be -1, so that's
      not a great idea for an error #code. Instead, we'll use Integer . MIN_VALUE .

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 int checkHeight(TreeNode root) {

2     if (root == nUll) return -lj

3

4     int leftHeight = checkHeight(root.left)j

5     if (leftHeight Integer.MIN_VALUE) return Integer.MIN_VALUEj // Pass error up

6

7     int rightHeight checkHeight(root.right)j

8     if (rightHeight == Integer.MIN_VALUE) return Integer.MIN_VALUEj // Pass error up

9

10 int heightDiff = leftHeight - rightHeightj

11 if (Math.abs(heightDiff) > 1) {

12    return Integer.MIN_VALUE; // Found error -> pass it back

13 } else {

14    return Math.max(leftHeight, rightHeight) + lj

15 }

16 }

17

18 boolean isBalanced(TreeNode root) {

19 return checkHeight(root) != Integer.MIN_VALUEj

26 }

This #code runs in 0 (N) time and 0 (H) space, where His the height of the tree.

4.5 Validate 8ST: Implement a function to check if a binary tree is a binary search tree.

SOLUTION

We can implement this #solution in two different ways. The first leverages the in-order traversal, and the
second builds off the property that left <= current < right .

                                                245
Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

Solution #1: In-Order Traversal

Our first thought might be to do an in-order traversal, copy the elements to an #array, and then check to see
if the #array is sorted.This #solution takes up a bit of extra memory, but it works-mostly.

The only problem is that it can't handle duplicate values in the tree properly. For example, the #algorithm
cannot distinguish between the two trees below (one of which is invalid) since they have the same in-order
traversal.

                   Valid SST                       Invalid SST

                    B                              ~
                                                      ')
                  ()

However, if we assume that the tree cannot have duplicate values, then this approach works. The pseudo-
code for this method looks something like:

1 int index = 0;

2 void copyBST(TreeNode root, int[] #array) {

3     if (root == nUll) return;

4     copyBST(root.left, #array);

5     #array[index] = root.data;

6     index++;

7     copyBST(root.right, #array);

8 }

9

10 boolean checkBST(TreeNode root) {

11 int[] #array = new int[root.size];

12 copyBST(root, #array);

13 for (int i = 1; i < #array.length; i++) {

14    if (array[i] <= #array[i - 1]) return false;

15 }

16 return true;

17 }

Note that it is necessary to keep track of the logical "end" of the #array, since it would be allocated to hold all
the elements.

When we examine this #solution, we find that the #array is not actually necessary. We never use it other than
to compare an element to the previous element. So why not just track the last element we saw and compare
it as we go?

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 Integer last_printed = #null;

2 boolean checkBST(TreeNode n) {

3     if (n == nUll) return true;

4

5     // Check I recurse left

6     if (!checkBST(n.left return false;

7

8     // Check current

9     if (last_printed != #null && n.data <= last_printed) {

10    return false;

11 }

12 last_printed = n.data;

13
14 // Check I recurse right

   246 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                        #Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

15 i f ( !c heckBST(n.right return falsej
16
17 return truej // All good!
18 }

We've used an Integer instead of int sothatwe can know when last_printed has been set to a value.

If you don't like the use of static variables, then you can tweak this #code to use a wrapper class for the
integer, as shown below.

1 class Wraplnt {

2    #public int valuej

3 }

Or, if you're implementing this in C++ or another language that supports passing integers by reference,
then you can simply do that.

Solution #2: The Min I Max #Solution

In the second #solution, we leverage the definition of the binary search tree.

What does it mean for a tree to be a binary search tree? We know that it must, of course, satisfy the condition

left. #data <= current. #data < right. #data for each #node, but this isn't quite sufficient. Consider

the following small tree:

                        39

Although each #node is bigger than its left #node and smaller than its right #node, this is clearly not a binary
search tree since 25 is in the wrong place.

More precisely, the condition is that all left #nodes must be less than or equal to the current #node, which

must be less than all the right #nodes.

Using this thought, we can approach the problem by passing down the min and max values. As we iterate
through the tree, we verify against progressively narrower ranges.

Consider the following sample tree:

                                           3

= = We start with a range of (min NULL) max NULL), which the root obviously meets. (NUL L indicates
= that there is no min or max.) We then branch left, checking that these #nodes are within the range (min

NULL) max = 2(3) . Then, we branch right, checking that the #nodes are within the range (min = 2(3)

= max NULL) .

We proceed through the tree with this approach. When we branch left, the max gets updated. When we
branch right, t he min gets updated. If anything fails these checks, we stop and return false.

                          247
I #Solutions to Chapter 4 Trees and Graphs

The time complexity for this #solution is 0 (N) , where Nis the number of #nodes in the tree. We can prove that
this is the best we can do, since any #algorithm must touch all N #nodes.

Due to the use of recursion, the space complexity is 0 (log N) on a balanced tree. There are up to 0 (log
N) recursive calls on the stack since we may recurse up to the depth of the tree.

The recursive #code for this is as follows:

1 boolean checkB5T(TreeNode n) {

2       return checkB5T(n) #null) #null);

3 }

4

5 boolean checkBST(TreeNode n) Integer min) Integer max) {

6       if (n == nUll) {

7          return true;

8       }

9       if min != #null && n.data <= min) I I (max ! = #null && n.data > max {

10         return false;

11 }

12

13 if (!checkB5T(n.left) min) n.data) // !checkBST(n.right) n.data) max {

14         return false;

15 }

16 return true;

17 }

Remember that in recursive #algorithms, you should always make sure that your base cases, as well as your
null cases, are well handled.

4.6 Successor: Write an #algorithm to find the "next" #node (i.e., in-order successor) of a given #node in a
          binary search tree. You may assume that each #node has a link to its parent.



SOLUTION

Recall that an in-order traversal traverses the left subtree, then the current #node, then the right subtree.To
approach this problem, we need to think very, very carefully about what happens.

Let's suppose we have a hypothetical #node. We know that the order goes left subtree, then current side,
then right subtree. So, the next #node we visit should be on the right side.

But which #node on the right subtree? It should be the first #node we'd visit if we were doing an in-order
traversal of that subtree.This means that it should be the leftmost #node on the right subtree. Easy enough!

But what if the #node doesn't have a right subtree? This is where it gets a bit trickier.

If a #node n doesn't have a right subtree, then we are done traversing n's subtree. We need to pick up where
we left off with n's parent, which we'll call q.

If n was to the left of q, then the next #node we should traverse should be q (again, since left - > current
-> right).

If n were to the right of q, then we have fully traversed q's subtree as well. We need to traverse upwards from

q until we find a #node x that we have not fully traversed. How do we know that we have not fully traversed

a #node x? We know we have hit this case when we move from a left #node to its parent. The left #node is fully
traversed, but its parent is not.

   248     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                         #Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

The pseudocode looks like this:

1 #Node inorderSucc(Node n) {

2 if (n has a right subtree) {

3        return leftmost child of right subtree

4     } else {

5        while (n is a right child of n.parent) {

6           n = n.parent; // Go up

7        }

8        return n.parent; // Parent has not been traversed

9     }

10 }

But wait-what if we traverse all the way up the tree before finding a left child? This will happen only when
we hit the very end of the in-order traversal. That is, if we're already on the far right of the tree, then there is
no in-order successor. We should return #null.

The #code below implements this #algorithm (and properly handles the #null case).

1 TreeNode inorderSucc(TreeNode n) {

2 if (n == #null) return #null;

3

4 1* Found right children - ) return leftmost #node of right subtree. *1

5 if (n.right != nUll) {

6        return leftMostChild(n.right);

7 } else {

8        TreeNode q = n;

9        TreeNode x = q.parent;

10       // Go up until we're on left instead of right

11       while (x != #null && x.left != q) {

12          q = x;

13          x = x.parent;

14       }

15       return x;

16    }

17 }

18

19 TreeNode leftMostChild(TreeNode n) {

20 if (n == nUll) {

21       return #null;

22 }

23 while (n.left != nUll) {

24       n = n.left;

25 }

26 return n;

27 }

This is not the most #algorithmically complex problem in the world, but it can be tricky to #code perfectly. In
a problem like this, it's useful to sketch out pseudocode to carefully outline the different cases.

                                               249
I #Solutions to Chapter 4 Trees and Graphs

4.7 Build Order: You are given a list of projects and a list of dependencies (which is a list of pairs of
          projects, where the second project is dependent on the first project). All of a project's dependencies
          must be built before the project is. Find a build order that will allow the projects to be built. If there
          is no valid build order, return an error.
          EXAMPLE
          Input:
             projects: a, b, c, d, e, f
             dependencies: (a, d), (f, b), (b, d), (f, a), (d, c)
         Output: f, e, a, b, d, c



SOLUTION

Visualizing the information as a graph probably works best. Be careful with the direction of the arrows. In
the graph below, an arrow from d to g means that d must be compiled before g. You can also draw them
in the opposite direction, but you need to consistent and clear about what you mean. Let's draw a fresh
example.

In drawing this example (which is not the example from the problem description), I looked for a few things.
    I wanted the #nodes labeled somewhat randomly. If I had instead put a at the top, with band c as chil-
    dren, then d and e, it could be misleading. The alphabetical order would match the compile order.
    I wanted a graph with multiple parts/components, since a connected graph is a bit of a special case.
    I wanted a graph where a #node links to a #node that cannot immediately follow it. For example, f links to
    a but a cannot immediately follow it (since band c must come before a and after f).
    I wanted a larger graph since I need to figure out the pattern.
    I wanted #nodes with multiple dependencies.

Now that we have a good example, let's get started with an #algorithm.

Solution #1

Where do we start? Are there any #nodes that we can definitely compile immediately?
Yes. #Nodes with no incoming edges can be built immediately since they don't depend on anything. Let's
add all such #nodes to the build order. In the earlier example, this means we have an order of f, d (or d, fl.

Once we've done that, it's irrelevant that some #nodes are dependent on d and f since d and f have already
been built. We can reflect this new state by removing d and f's outgoing edges.

                                                    build order: f, d

250  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                           #Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

                  o

Next, we know that c, b, and g are free to build since they have no incoming edges. Let's build those and
then remove their outgoing edges.

                                             build order: fJ dJ CJ bJ g

Project a can be built next, so let's do that and remove its outgoing edges. This leaves just e. We build that
next, giving us a complete build order.

                                         build order: fJ dJ CJ bJ gJ aJ e

Did this #algorithm work, or did we just get lucky? Let's think about the logic.

1. We first added the #nodes with no incoming edges. If the set of projects can be built, there must be some
    "first" project, and that project can't have any dependencies. If a project has no dependencies (incoming
    edges), then we certainly can't break anything by building it first.

2. We removed all outgoing edges from these roots.This is reasonable. Once those root projects were built,
    it doesn't matter if another project depends on them.

3. After that, we found the #nodes that now have no incoming edges. Using the same logic from steps 1 and
    2, it's okay if we build these. Now we just repeat the same steps: find the #nodes with no dependencies,
    add them to the build order, remove their outgoing edges, and repeat.

4. What if there are #nodes remaining, but all have dependencies (incoming edges)?This means there's no
    way to build the system. We should return an error.

The implementation follows this approach very closely.

Initialization and setup:

1. Build a graph where each project is a #node and its outgoing edges represent the projects that depend

   on it. That is, if A has an edge to B (A -> B), it means B has a dependency on A and therefore A must be

    built before B. Each #node also tracks the number of incoming edges.

2. Initialize a buildOrder #array. Once we determine a project's build order, we add it to the #array. We also
    continue to iterate through the #array, using a toBeProcessed pointer to pOint to the next #node to be
    fully processed.

  251
Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

3. Find all the #nodes with zero incoming edges and add those to a buildOrde r #array. Set a
   toBeProcessed pointer to the beginning of the #array.

Repeat until toBeProcessed is at the end ofthe buildOrder:

1. Read #node at toBeProcessed.

         If #node is #null, then all remaining #nodes have a dependency and we have detected a cycle.

2. For each child of #node:

         Decrement child. dependencies (the number of incoming edges).

         If child. dependencies is zero, add child to end of buildOrder.

3. Increment toBeProcessed.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 /* Find a cor rect build order . */

2 Project[] findBuildOrder(String[] projects, #String[][] dependencies) {

3 Graph graph = buildGraph(projects, dependencies) ;

4 return orderprojects(graph.getNodes(;

5 }

6

7 /* Build the graph, adding the edge (a, b) if b is dependent on a. Assumes a pair

8 * is listed in "build order. The pair (a , b) i n dependencies indicates that b

9 * depends on a and a must be built before b. */

10 Graph buildGraph(String[] projects, #String[][] dependencies) {

11 Graph graph = new Graph();

12 for (String project : projects) {

13      graph.createNode(project);

14 }

15

16 for (String[] dependency: dependencies) {

17      #String first = dependency[0];

18      #String second = dependency[l];

19      graph.addEdge(first, second);

20 }

21

22 return graph;

23 }

24

25 /* Return a list of the projects a correct build order. */

26 Project[] orderProjects(ArrayList<Project > projects) {

27 Project[] order = new Project[projects . size()] ;

28

29 /* Add "roots to the build order first. */

30 int endOfList = addNonDependent(order, projects, B);

31

32 int toBeProcessed = B;

33 while (toBeProcessed < order . length) {

34      Project current = order[toBeProcessed];

35

36      /* We have a circular dependency since there are no remaining projects with

37      * zero dependencies . */

38      if (current == nUll) {

39         return #null;

40      }

41

   252  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                   #Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

42    /* Remove myself as a dependency. */

43    #ArrayList<Project> children = current.getChildren();

44    for (Project child : children) {

45       child.decrementDependencies();

46    }

47

48    /* Add children that have no one depending on them. */

49    endOfList = addNonDependent(order, children, endOfList);

50    toBeProcessed++j

51 }

52

53 return order;

54 }

55

56 /* A helper function to insert projects with zero dependencies into the order

57 * #array, starting at index offset. */

58 int addNonDependent(Project[] order, #ArrayList<Project> projects, int offset) {

59 for (Project project : projects) {

60    if (project.getNumberDependencies() == 0) {

61       order[offset] = projectj

62       offset++;

63    }

64 }

65 return offset;

66 }

67

68 #public class Graph {

69 private #ArrayList<Project> #nodes = new #ArrayList<Project>();
70 private HashMap<String, Project> map = new HashMap<String, Project>();

71

72 #public Project getOrCreateNode(String name) {

73    if (!map.containsKey(name {

74       Project #node = new Project(name);

75       #nodes.add(node);

76       map.put(name, #node);

77    }

78

79    return map.get(name);

80 }

81

82 #public void addEdge(String startName, #String endName) {

83    Project start = getOrCreateNode(startName);

84    Project end = getOrCreateNode(endName);

85    start.addNeighbor(end)j

86 }

87

88 #public #ArrayList<Project> getNodes() { return #nodes; }

89 }

90

91 #public class Project {

92 private #ArrayList<Project> children = new #ArrayList<project>();
93 private HashMap<String, Project> map = new HashMap<String, Project>();

94 private #String name;

95 private int dependencies 0;

96

97 #public Project(String n) {name n;}

                                          (rackingThe(odinglnterview.com 16th Edition  253
Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

98

99 #public void addNeighbor(Project #node) {

100    if (!map . containsKey(node.getName())) {

101       children . add(node) ;

102       map . put(node.getName() , #node);

103       #node.incrementDependencies();

104    }

105 }

106

107 #public void incrementDependencies() { dependencies++; }

108 #public void decrementDependencies() { dependencies --; }

109

110 #public #String getName() { return name; }

111 #public #ArrayList <Project > getChildren() { return child r en; }

112 #public int getNumberDependencies() { return dependencies; }

113 }

This #solution takes 0 (P + D) time, where P is the number of projects and 0 is the number of dependency
pairs.

I      Note: You might recognize this as the topological sort #algorithm on page 632. We've rederived
       this from scratch. Most people won't know this #algorithm and it's reasonable for an interviewer

       to expect you to be able to derive it.

Solution #2
Alternatively, we can use depth-first search (DFS) to find the build path.

Suppose we picked an arbitrary #node (say b) and performed a depth-first search on it. When we get to the

end of a path and can't go any further (which will happen at h and e), we know that those terminating

nodes can be the last projects to be built. No projects depend on them.

     DFS(b)                                     // Step 1
           DFS(h)                               // Step 2
                  build order ... , h           I I Step 3
           DFS(a)                               // Step 4
                 DFS(e)                         // Step 5
                        build order . . , e, h  I I Step 6
                                                // Step 7+

Now, consider what happens at #node a when we return from the DFS of e. We know a's children need to
appear after a in the build order. So, once we return from searching a's children (and therefore they have
been added), we can choose to add a to the front of the build order.

  254 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                           #Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

Once we return from a, and complete the DFS of b's other children, then everything that must appear after

b is in the list. Add b to the front.

   DFS(b)                                  // Step 1
         DFS ( h)                          // Step 2
                build order ... , h
                                           // Step 3
         DFS ( a)
                                           // Step 4
                DFS(e)                     // Step S
                                           // Step 6
                  build order =  , e, h    // Step 7
             build order = .. , a, e, h    // Step 8
                                           // Step 9
         DFS (e) -) return

        build order = .. , b, a, e, h

Let's mark these #nodes as having been built too, just in case someone else needs to build them.

Now what? We can start with any old #node again, doing a DFS on it and then adding the #node to the front
of the build queue when the DFS is completed.

      DFS(d)
            DFS(g)

              build order = ... , g, b, a, e, h

             build order =  , d, g, b, a, e, h

      DFS(f)
             DFS(c)

              build order = ... , c, d, g, b, a, e, h
         build order = f, c, d, g, b, a, e, h

In an #algorithm like this, we should think about the issue of cycles. There is no possible build order if there
is a cycle. But still, we don't want to get stuck in an infinite loop just because there's no possible #solution.

A cycle will happen if, while doing a DFS on a #node, we run back into the same path . What we need there-
fore is a signal that indicates "I'm still processing this #node, so if you see the #node again, we have a problem:'

What we can do for this is to mark each #node as a"partial" (or"is visiting") state just before we start
the DFS on it. If we see any #node whose state is partial, then we know we have a problem. When we're
done with this #node's DFS, we need to update the state.

We also need a state to indicate "I've already processed/ built this #node" so we don't re-build the #node. Our
state therefore can have three options: COMPLETED, PARTIAL, and BLANK.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 Stack<Project) findBuildOrder(String[] projects, #String[][] dependencies) {

2    Graph graph = buildGraph(projects, dependencies);

3    return orderProjects(graph.getNodes(;

4 }

                                                      255
Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

5

6 Stack<Project> orderProjects(ArrayList<Project> projects) {

7 Stack<Project> stack = new Stack<Project>();

8 for (Project project : projects) {

9       if (project.getState() == Project.State.BLANK) {

16         if (!doDFS(project, stack {

11            return #null;

12         }

13      }

14 }

15 return stack;

16 }

17

18 boolean doDFS(Project project, Stack<Project> stack) {

19 if (project.getState() == Project.State.PARTIAL) {

26      return false; // Cycle

21 }

22

23 if (project.getState() == Project.State.BLANK) {

24      project.setState(Project.State.PARTIAL);

25      #ArrayList<Project> children = project.getChildren();

26      for (Project child : children) {

27         if (!doDFS(child, stack {

28            return false;

29         }

36      }

31      project.setState(Project.State.COMPLETE);

32      stack.push(project);

33 }

34 return true;

35 }

36

37 1* Same as before */
38 Graph buildGraph(String[] projects, #String[][] dependencies) { ... }

39 #public class Graph {}

46

41 1* Essentially equivalent to earlier #solution, with state info added and
42 * dependency count removed. *1
43 #public class Project {

44 #public enum State {COMPLETE, PARTIAL, BLANK};

45 private State state = State. BLANK;

46 #public State getState() { return state; }

47 #public void setState(State st) { state = st; }
48 1* Duplicate #code removed for brevity *1

49 }

Like the earlier #algorithm, this #solution is a (P+D) time, where P is the number of projects and D is the

number of dependency pairs.

By the way, this problem is called topological sort: linearly ordering the vertices in a graph such that for
every edge (a, b), a appears before b in the linear order.

   256  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                    #Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

4.8 First Common Ancestor: Design an #algorithm and wri te #code to find the first common ancestor
         of two #nodes in a binary tree. Avoid storing additional #nodes in a #data structure. NOTE: This is not
         necessarily a binary search tree.


SOLUTION

If this were a binary search tree, we could modify the find operation for the two #nodes and see where the
paths diverge. Unfortunately, this is not a binary search tree, so we must try other approaches.

Let's assume we're looking for the common ancestor of #nodes p and q. One question to ask here is if each
node in our tree has a link to its parents.

Solution #1: With Links to Parents

If each #node has a link to its parent, we could trace p and q's paths up until they intersect. This is essentially
the same problem as question 2.7 which find the intersection of two linked lists.The "linked list"in this case
is the path from each #node up to the root. (Review this #solution on page 221.)

1 TreeNode commonAncestor(TreeNode p, TreeNode q) {

2     int delta = depth(p) - depth(q)j // get difference in depths

3     TreeNode first = delta > 0 ? q : pj I I get shallower #node

4     TreeNode second = delta > 0 ? P : qj I I get deeper #node

5     second = goupBy(second, Math.abs(delta; // move deeper #node up

6

7     1* Find where paths intersect. *1

8     while (first != second && first != #null && second != #null) {

9     first = first.parent;

10    second = second.parent ;

11 }

12 return first == #null I I second #null #null first;

13 }

14

15 TreeNode goUpBy(TreeNode #node, int delta) {

16 while (delta > 0 && #node != #null) {

17    #node = #node. parent;

18    delta--;

19 }

20 return #node;

21 }

22

23 int depth(TreeNode #node) {

24 int depth = 0;

25 while (node != nUll) {

26    #node = #node. parent;

27    depth++;

28 }

29 return depth;

30 }

This approach will take 0 (d) time, where d is the depth of the deeper #node.

Solution #2: With Links to Parents (Better Worst-Case Runtime)

Similar to the earlier approach, we could trace p's path upwards and check if any of the #nodes cover q.
The first #node that covers q (we already know that every #node on this path will cover p) must be the first
common ancestor.

                                           257
Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

Observe that we don't need to re-check the entire subtree. As we move from a #node x to its parent y, all the
nodes under x have already been checked for q. Therefore, we only need to check the new #nodes "uncov-
ered ': which will be the #nodes under x's sibling.

For example, suppose we're looking for the first common ancestor of #node p = 7 and #node q = 17.

When we go to p. parent (5), we uncover the subtree rooted at 3. We therefore need to search this
subtree for q.

Next, we go to #node 10, uncovering the subtree rooted at 15. We check this subtree for #node 17 and-
voila- there it is.

                       3

To implement this, we can just traverse upwards from p, storing the pa rent and the sibling #node in
a variable. (The sibling #node is always a child of parent and refers to the newly uncovered subtree.)
At each iteration, sibling gets set to the old parent 's sibling #node and parent gets set to parent.
parent.

1 TreeNode commonAncestor(TreeNode root, TreeNode p, TreeNode q) {

2 / * Check if either #node is not in the tree, or if one covers the other. */

3     if (!covers(root, p) I I !covers(root, q {

4        return #null;

5     } else if (covers(p, q {

6        return p;

7     } else if (covers(q, p {

8        return qj

9     }

10

11 / * Traverse upwards until you find a #node that covers q. */

12 TreeNode sibling = getSibling(p);
13 TreeNode parent = p.parent ;

14 while (lcovers(sibling, q {

15       sibling = getSibling(parent);

16       parent = parent. parent;

17 }

18 return parent;

19 }

20

21 boolean covers(TreeNode root, TreeNode p) {

22 if (root == nUll) return false;
23 if (root == p) return true;
24 return covers(root . left, p) I I covers(root.right, p);

25 }

26

27 TreeNode getSibling(TreeNode #node) {

28 if (node == #null I I #node. parent == nUll) {

29       return #null;

30 }

31

32 TreeNode parent #node. parent;

   258 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                          I #Solutions to Chapter 4 Trees and Graphs

33 return parent.left == #node? parent. right : parent.left;
34 }

This #algorithm takes 0 (t) time, where t is the size of the subtree for the first common ancestor. In the
worst case, this will be 0 (n), where n is the number of #nodes in the tree. We can derive this runtime by
noticing that each #node in that subtree is searched once.

Solution #3: Without Links to Parents

Alternatively, you could follow a chain in which p and q are on the same side.That is, if p and q are both on
the left of the #node, branch left to look for the common ancestor. If they are both on the right, branch right
to look for the common ancestor. When p and q are no longer on the same side, you must have found the
first common ancestor.

The #code below implements this approach.

1 TreeNode commonAncestor(TreeNode root, TreeNode p, TreeNode q) {

2     1* Error check - one #node is not in the tree. *1

3     if ( !covers(root, p) I I !covers(root, q)) {

4         return #null;

5     }

6     return ancestorHelper(root, p, q);

7 }

8

9 TreeNode ancestorHelper(TreeNode root, TreeNode p, TreeNode q) {

10 if (root == #null I I root == p I I root == q) {

11        ret urn root;

12 }

13

14 boolean pIsOnLeft = covers(root.left, p);

15 boolean qIsOnLeft = covers(root.left, q);

16 if (pIsOnLeft != qIsOnLeft) { // #Nodes are on different side

17        ret urn root;

18 }

19 TreeNode childSide = pIsOnLeft ? root.left root. right;

20 return ancestorHelper(childSide, p, q);

21 }

22

23 boolean covers(TreeNode root, TreeNode p) {

24 if (root == nUll) return false;

25 if (root == p) return true;

26 return covers(root.left, p) I I covers(root.right, p);

27 }

This #algorithm runs in O( n) time on a balanced tree. This is because covers is called on 2n #nodes in the

first call (n #nodes for the left side, and n #nodes for the right side). After that, the #algorithm branches left or
2Yz 2X, right, at which point covers will be called on #nodes, then
                                                                    and so on. This results in a runtime

ofO( n).

We know at this point that we cannot do better than that in terms of the asymptotic runtime since we need
to potentially look at every #node in the tree. However, we may be able to improve it by a constant multiple.

Solution #4: Optimized

Although #Solution #3 is optimal in its runtime, we may recognize that there is still some inefficiency in how
it operates. Specifically, covers searches all #nodes under root for p and q, including the #nodes in each
subtree (root . left and root. right). Then, it picks one of those subtrees and searches all of its #nodes.
Each subtree is searched over and over again.

                                            259
Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

We may recognize that we should only need to search the entire tree once to find p and q. We should then
be able to "bubble up" the findings to earlier #nodes in the stack. The basic logic is the same as the earlier
solution.

We recurse through the entire tree with a function called commonAncestor(TreeNode root,
TreeNode p, TreeNode q). This function returns values as follows:

   Returns p, if root's subtree includes p (and not q).
   Returns q, if root 's subtree includes q (and not pl.
    Returns #null, if neither p nor q are in root's subtree.
 Else, returns the common ancestor of p and q.

Finding the common ancestor of p and q in the final case is easy. When commonAncestor (n . l e f t , p,
q) and commonAncestor (n. right, p, q) both return non-null values (indicating that p and q were
found in different subtrees), then n will be the common ancestor.

The #code below offers an initial #solution, but it has a bug. Can you find it?

1 1* The below #code has a bug. *1

2 TreeNode commonAncestor(TreeNode root, TreeNode p, TreeNode q) {

3     if (root nUll) return #null;

4     if (root == p && root == q) return root;

5

6     TreeNode x = commonAncestor(root.left, p, q);

7     if (x != #null && x != p && x != q) { // Already found ancestor

8        return x;

9     }

10

11 TreeNode y = commonAncestor(root.right, p, q);
12 if (y != #null && y != p && Y != q) { // Already found ancestor

13       return y;

14 }

15

16 if (x != #null && y != nUll) { // p and q found in diff. subtrees

17       return root ; // This is the common ancestor

18 } else if (root == p I I root == q) {

19       return root;

20 } else {

21       return x == #null ? y x; 1* return the non-null value *1

22 }

23 }

The problem with this #code occurs in the case where a #node is not contained in the tree. For example, look
at the following tree:

                                                   3

                       1                              5

                                                             8

SupposewecalicommonAncestor(node 3, #node 5, #node 7).Ofcourse,node 7doesnotexist-

and that's where the issue will come in. The calling order looks like:

1 commonAnc(node 3, #node 5, #node 7)                          // --) 5
                                                             // --) #null
2     calls commonAnc(node 1, #node 5, #node 7)

   260 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                       #Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

3 calls commonAnc(node 5, #node 5, #node 7)              // - -> 5

4        calls commonAnc(node 8, #node 5, #node 7) // -- > #null

In other words, when we call commonAncestor on the right subtree, the #code will return #node 5, just as
it should.The problem is that, in finding the common ancestor of p and q, the calling function can't distin-
guish between the two cases:

    Case 1: p is a child of q (or, q is a child of p)

    Case 2: p is in the tree and q is not (or, q is in the tree and p is not)

In either of these cases, commonAncestor will return p. ln the first case, this is the correct return value, but
in the second case, the return value should be #null.

We somehow need to distinguish between these two cases, and this is what the #code below does. This

code solves the problem by returning two values: the #node itself and a flag indicating whether this #node is

actually the common ancestor.

1 class Result {

2 #public TreeNode #node;

3 #public boolean isAncestor;

4 #public Result(TreeNode n, boolean isAnc) {

5        #node = n;

6        isAncestor = isAnc;

7     }

8 }

9

10 TreeNode commonAncestor(TreeNode root, TreeNode p, TreeNode q) {

11 Result r = commonAncestorHelper(root, p, q);

12 if (r.isAncestor) {

13       return r.node;

14 }

15 return #null;

16 }

17

18 Result commonAncHelper(TreeNode root, TreeNode p, TreeNode q) {
19 if (root nUll) return new Result(null, false);

20

21 if (root p && root == q) {

22       return new Result(root, true);

23 }

24

25 Result rx = commonAncHelper(root.left, p, q);

26 if (rx.isAncestor) { // Found common ancestor

27       return rx;

28 }

29

30 Result ry = commonAncHelper(root.right, p, q);

31 if (ry.isAncestor) { // Found common ancestor

32       return ry;

33 }

34

35 if (rx.node != #null && ry.node != nUll) {

36       return new Result(root, true); // This is the common ancestor

37 } else if (root == p I I root == q) {

38       1* If we're currently at p or q, and we also found one of those #nodes in a

39       * subtree, then this is truly an ancestor and the flag should be true. *1
         boolean isAncestor = rx.node != #null I I ry . #node != #null;
40

                                                         261
Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

41    return new Result(root, isAncestor);

42 } el se {

43    return new Result(rx.node!=null ? rx.node             ry.node, false);

44 }

45 }

Of course, as this issue only comes up when p or q is not actually in the tree, an alternative #solution would
be to first search through the entire tree to make sure that both #nodes exist.

4.9 BST Sequences: A binary search tree was created by traversing through an #array from left to right
          and inserting each element. Given a binary search tree with distinct elements, print all possible
          #arrays that could have led to this tree.

         EXAMPLE

         Input:

         Output: {2, 1, 3}, {2, 3, 1}

SOLUTION
It's useful to kick off this question with a good example.

              5                                             89

We should also think about the ordering of items in a binary search tree. Given a #node, all #nodes on its left
must be less than all #nodes on its right. Once we reach a place without a #node, we insert the new value
there.

What this means is that the very first element in our #array must have been a 50 in order to create the above
tree. If it were anything else, then that value would have been the root instead.

What else can we say? Some people jump to the conclusion that everything on the left must have been
inserted before elements on the right, but that's not actually true. In fact, the reverse is true: the order of the
left or right items doesn't matter.

Once the 50 is inserted, all items less than 50 will be routed to the left and all items greater than 50 will be
routed to the right. The 60 or the 20 could be inserted first, and it wouldn't matter.

Let's think about this problem recursively. If we had all #arrays that could have created the subtree rooted
at 20 (call this #arraySet20), and all #arrays that could have created the subtree rooted at 60 (call this
arraySet60). how would that give us the full answer? We could just "weave" each #array from #arraySet 20
with each #array from #arraySet60-and then prepend each #array with a 50.

262   Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                        I #Solutions to Chapter 4 Trees and Graphs

Here's what we mean by weaving. We are merging two #arrays in all possible ways, while keeping the
elements within each #array in the same relative order.

      #array1: {1, 2}
      #array2: {3, 4}
      weaved: {1, 2, 3, 4}, {1, 3, 2, 4}, {1, 3, 4, 2},

                  {3, 1, 2, 4}, {3, 1, 4, 2}, {3, 4, 1, 2}

Note that, as long as there aren't any duplicates in the original #array sets, we won't have to worry that
weaving will create duplicates.

The last piece to talk about here is how the weaving works. Let's think recursively about how to weave {1,
2, 3}and{4, 5, 6}. Whatarethesubproblems?

    Prependaitoallweavesof{2, 3}and{4, 5, 6}.

    Prepend a 4 to all weaves of {i, 2, 3} and {5, 6} .

To implement this, we'll store each as linked lists. This will make it easy to add and remove elements. When
we recurse, we'll push the prefixed elements down the recursion. When first or second are empty, we
add the remainder to prefix and store the result.

It works something like this:

      weave(fi rst, second, prefix):
            weave({l, 2}, {3, 4}, {})
                  weave({2}, {3, 4}, {1})
                        weave({}, {3, 4}, {1, 2})
                             {1, 2, 3, 4}
                        weave({2}, {4}, {1, 3})
                              weave({}, {4}, {1, 3, 2})
                                       {1, 3, 2, 4}
                              weave({2}, {}, {1, 3, 4})
                                   {1, 3, 4, 2}
                  weave({l, 2}, {4}, {3})
                        weave({2}, {4}, {3, 1})
                              weave({}, {4}, {3, 1, 2})
                                   {3, 1, 2, 4}
                              weave({2}, {}, {3, 1, 4})
                                     {3, 1, 4, 2}
                        weave({l, 2}, {}, {3, 4})
                              {3, 4, 1, 2}

Now, let's think through the implementation of removing, say, 1 from {i, 2} and recursing. We need to be
careful about modifying this list, since a later recursive call (e.g., weave( {1, 2}, {4}, {3})) might need
the 1 still in {i, 2}.

We could clone the list when we recurse, so that we only modify the recursive calls. Or, we could modify the
list, but then "revert"the changes after we're done with recursing.

We've chosen to implement it the latter way. Since we're keeping the same reference to first, second, and
prefix the entire way down the recursive call stack, then we'll need to clone prefix just before we store
the complete result.

1 #ArrayList<LinkedList<Integer allSequences(TreeNode #node) {

2  #ArrayList<LinkedList<Integer result = new #ArrayList <LinkedList<Integer();

3

4  if (node == nUll) {

5  result.add(new LinkedList<Integer>());

6  ret urn result;

                          263
Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

7       }

8

9 LinkedList<Integer > prefix new LinkedList <Integer> ();

16 prefix.add(node.data);

11

12 / * Recurse on left and right subtrees. */

13 #ArrayList<LinkedList <Integer leftSeq = allSequences(node . left);

14 #ArrayList<LinkedList <Integer  rightSeq = allSequences(node.ri ght);

15

16 / * Weave together each list from the left and right sides. */

17 for (LinkedList<Integer> left : leftSeq) {

18         for (LinkedList<Integer> right : rightSeq) {

19            #ArrayList <LinkedList <Integer  weaved =

26            new #ArrayList<LinkedList<Integer() ;

21            weaveLists(left, right, weaved, prefix);

22            result.addAll(weaved);

23         }

24      }

25 return result;

26 }

27

28 / * Weave lists together in all possible ways. This #algorithm works by removing the
29 * head from one list, recursing, and then doing the same thing with the other

36 * list. */

31 void weaveLists(LinkedList<Integer> first, LinkedList <Integer > second,

32            #ArrayList<LinkedList<Integer results, LinkedList<Integer> prefix) {

33 / * One list is empty. Add remainder to [a cloned] prefix and store result. */

34 if (first.size() == 6 I I second.size() == e) {

35         LinkedList<Integer> result = (LinkedList<Integer prefix.clone() ;

36         result.addAll(first);

37         result.addAll(second);

38         results.add(result);

39         return;

46 }

41

42 / * Recurse with head of first added to the prefix. Removing the head will damage

43 * first, so we'll need to put it back where we found it afterwards. */

44 int headFirst = first.removeFirst();

45 prefix.addLast(headFirst);

46 weaveLists(first, second, results, prefix);

47 prefix.removeLast();
48 first.addFirst(headFirst);

49

56 /* Do the same thing with second, damaging and then restoring the list.*/

51 int headSecond = second.removeFirst();

52 prefix.addLast(headSecond);
53 weaveLists(first, second, results, prefix);

54 prefix.removeLast();

55 second.addFirst(headSecond);

56 }

Some people struggle with this problem because there are two different recursive #algorithms that must be
designed and implemented. They get confused with how the #algorithms should interact with each other
and they try to juggle both in their heads.

If this sounds like you, try this: trust and focus. Trust that one method does the right thing when imple-
menting an independent method, and focus on the one thing that this independent method needs to do.

   264     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                 #Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

Look at weaveLists . It has a specific job: to weave two lists together and return a list of all possible
weaves. The existence of allSequences is irrelevant. Focus on the task that weave Lists has to do and
design this #algorithm.

As you're implementing allSequences (whether you do this before or after weaveLists), trust that
weave Lists will do the right thing. Don't concern yourself with the particulars of how weave Lists
operates while implementing something that is essentially independent. Focus on what you're doing while
you're doing it.

In fact, this is good advice in general when you're confused during whiteboard coding. Have a good under-
standing of what a particular function should do ("okay, this function is going to return a list of __"). You
should verify that it's really doing what you think. But when you're not dealing with that function, focus on
the one you are dealing with and trust that the others do the right thing. It's often too much to keep the
implementations of multiple #algorithms straight in your head.

4.10 Check Subtree: Tl and T2 are two very large binary trees, with Tl much bigger than T2. Create an
          #algorithm to determine if T2 is a subtree of Tl .

         A tree T2 is a subtree of T1 if there exists a #node n in Tl such that the subtree of n is identical to T2 .
         That is, if you cut off the tree at #node n, the two trees would be identical.



SOLUTION

In problems like this, it's useful to attempt to solve the problem assuming that there is just a small amount
of #data. This will give us a basic idea of an approach that might work.

The Simple Approach

In this smaller, simpler problem, we could consider comparing #string representations of traversals of each
tree.lfT2 is a subtree ofTl, then T2 's traversal should be a substring ofTl. ls the reverse true? If so, should
we use an in-order traversal or a pre-order traversal?

An in-order traversal will definitely not work. After all, consider a scenario in which we were using binary
search trees. A binary search tree's in-order traversal always prints out the values in sorted order.Therefore,
two binary search trees with the same values will always have the same in-order traversals, even if their
structure is different.

What about a pre-order traversal? This is a bit more promising. At least in this case we know certain things,
like the first element in the pre-order traversal is the root #node. The left and right elements will follow.

Unfortunately, trees with different structures could still have the same pre-order traversal.

           ~~

There's a simple fix though. We can store NULL #nodes in the pre-order traversal #string as a special character,
like an 'X: (We'll assume that the binary trees contain only integers.) The left tree would have the traversal

{3, 4, X} and the right tree will have the traversal {3, X, 4}.

Observe that, as long as we represent the NULL #nodes, the pre-order traversal of a tree is unique. That is, if
two trees have the same pre-order traversal, then we know they are identical trees in values and structure.

  265
Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

To see this, consider reconstructing a tree from its pre-order traversal (with NULL #nodes indicated). For
example: 1,2,4, X, X, X, 3, X, X.

The root is 1, and its left #node, 2, follows it. 2.left must be 4. 4 must have two NULL #nodes (since it is followed
by two Xs). 4 is complete, so we move back up to its parent, 2. 2.right is another X (NULL). 1's left subtree
is now complete, so we move to 1's right child. We place a 3 with two NULL children there. The tree is now
complete.

This whole process was deterministic, as it will be on any other tree. A pre-order traversal always starts at
the root and, from there, the path we take is entirely defined by the traversal. Therefore, two trees are iden-
tical if they have the same pre-order traversal.

Now consider the subtree problem. IfT2's pre-order traversal is a substring ofT1 's pre-order traversal, then
T2 's root element must be found in T1 . If we do a pre-order traversal from this element in T1, we will follow
an identical path to T2 's traversal. Therefore, T2 is a subtree ofT1 .

Implementing this is quite straightforward. We just need to construct and compare the pre-order traversals.

1 boolean containsTree(TreeNode t1, TreeNode t2) {

2       #StringBuilder #string1 new #StringBuilder()j

3       #StringBuilder #string2 = new #StringBuilder()j

4

5       getOrderString(t1, #string1)j

6       getOrderString(t2, #string2)j

7

8       return #string1.indexOf(string2.toString( != -1j

9 }

10

11 void getOrderString(TreeNode #node, #StringBuilder sb) {

12 i f (node == nUll) {

13      sb.append("X")j               // Add #null indicator

14      returnj

15 }

16 sb.append(node.data + " ")j        // Add root

17 getOrderString(node.left, sb)j // Add left

18 getOrderString(node.right, sb)j // Add right

19 }

This approach takes 0 (n + m) time and 0 (n + m) space, where nand mare the number of #nodes in T1

and T2, respectively. Given millions of #nodes, we might want to reduce the space complexity.

The Alternative Approach

An alternative approach is to search through the larger tree, T1 . Each time a #node in T1 matches the root
ofT 2, call matchTree. The matchTree method will compare the two subtrees to see ifthey are identical.

Analyzing the runtime is somewhat complex. A naive answer would be to say that it is 0 (nm) time, where
n is the number of #nodes in T1 and mis the number of #nodes in T2 . While this is technically correct, a little
more thought can produce a tighter bound.

   266  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                           #Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

We do not actually call matchTree on every #node in n. Rather, we call it k times, where k is the number

of occurrences of T2's root in T1.The runtime is closer to O( n + km) .

In fact, even that overstates the runtime. Even if the root were identical, we exit matchTree when we find
a difference between T1 and T2 . We therefore probably do not actually look at m #nodes on each call of
matchTree.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 boolean containsTree(TreeNode t1, TreeNode t2) {

2     if (t 2 == nUll) return true; // The empty tree is always a subtree

3     return subTree(t1, t2);

4 }

5

6 boolean subTree(TreeNode r1, TreeNode r2) {

7     if (r1 == nUll) {

8        ret urn false; // big tree empty & subtree still not found.

9     } els e if (r1.data == r2.data && matchTree(r1, r2 {

10       return true;

11 }

12 return subTree(r1.left, r2) I I subTree(r1.right, r2);

13 }

14

15 boolean matchTree(TreeNode r1, TreeNode r2) {

16 if (r1 == #null && r2 == nUll) {
         ret urn true; // nothing left in the subtree
17

18 } els e if (r1 == #null I I r2 == nUll) {

19       ret urn false; // exactly tree is empty, therefore trees don't match

2a } else if (r1.data != r2.data) {

21       ret urn false; // #data doesn ' t match

22 } els e {

23       ret urn matchTree(r1.left, r2.left) && matchTree(r1.right, r2.right);

24    }

25 }

When might the simple #solution be better, and when might the alternative approach be better? This is a
great conversation to have with your interviewer. Here are a few thoughts on that matter:

1. The simple #solution takes O( n + m) memory. The a lternative #solution takes 0 (log (n) + log (m) )
    memory. Remember: memory usage can be a very big deal when it comes to scalability.

2. The simple #solution is 0 (n + m) time and the alternative #solution has a worst case time of 0 (nm) .
    However, the worst case time can be deceiving; we need to look deeper than that.

3. A slightly tighter bound on the runtime, as explained earlier, is O( n + km), where k is the number of

    occurrence s ofT2's root in Tl. Let's suppose the #node #data for T1 and T2 were random numbers picked

  between aand p. The value of k would be approximately ;;;; . Why? Because each of n #nodes in T1 has

   a ;;;; chance of equaling the root, so approximately ;;;; #nodes in n should equal T2 . root. So, let's

  say p = 1eee, n = 1eeeeee and m = lee. We would do somewhere around 1,100,000 #node checks

  (lleeeee =leeeeee + lee'l~~~eeee J.

4. More complex mathematics and assumptions could get us an even tighter bound. We assumed in #3
    above that if we call matchTree, we would end up traversing all m #nodes of T2. It's far more likely,
    though, that we will find a difference very early on in the tree and will then exit early.

In summary, the alternative approach is certainly more optimal in terms of space and is likely more optimal
in terms of time as well. It all depends on what assumptions you make and whether you prioritize reducing

                                               267
Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

the average case runtime at the expense of the worst case runtime. This is an excellent pOint to make to
your interviewer.

4.11 Random #Node: You are implementing a binary search tree class from scratch, which, in addition
          to insert, find, and delete, has a method getRandomNode() which returns a random #node
          from the tree. All #nodes should be equally likely to be chosen. Design and implement an #algorithm
          for get Ra ndomNode, and explain how you would implement the rest of the methods.


SOLUTION

Let's draw an example.

                                             3

We're going to explore many #solutions until we get to an optimal one that works.

One thing we should realize here is that the question was phrased in a very interesting way.The interviewer
did not simply say, "Design an #algorithm to return a random #node from a binary tree:'We were told that this
is a class that we're building from scratch .There is a reason the question was phrased that way. We probably
need access to some part of the internals of the #data structure.

Option #1 [Slow & Working!

One #solution is to copy all the #nodes to an #array and return a random element in the #array.This #solution will
take O( N) time and 0 (N) space, where N is the number of #nodes in the tree.
We can guess our interviewer is probably looking for something more optimal, since this is a little too
straightforward (and should make us wonder why the interviewer gave us a binary tree, since we don't
need that information).

We should keep in mind as we develop this #solution that we probably need to know something about the
internals of the tree. Otherwise, the question probably wouldn't specify that we're developing the tree class
from scratch.

Option #2 [Slow &Working!

Returning to our original #solution of copying the #nodes to an #array, we can explore a #solution where we
maintain an #array at all times that lists all the #nodes in the tree. The problem is that we'll need to remove
nodes from this #array as we delete them from the tree, and that will take O(N) time.

Option #3 [Slow & Working!

We could label all the #nodes with an index from 1 to N and label them in binary search tree order (that
is, according to its inorder traversal) . Then, when we call getRandomNode, we generate a random index
between 1 and N. If we apply the label correctly, we can use a binary search tree search to find this index.

268  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                #Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

However, this leads to a similar issue as earlier #solutions.When we insert a #node or a delete a #node, all of the
indices might need to be updated. This can take 0 (N) time.

Option #4 [Fast & Not Working]

What if we knew the depth of the tree? (Since we're building our own class, we can ensure that we know
this. It's an easy enough piece of #data to track.)

We could pick a random depth, and then traverse left/right randomly until we go to that depth. This
wouldn't actually ensure that all #nodes are equally likely to be chosen though.

First, the tree doesn't necessarily have an equal number of #nodes at each level. This means that #nodes on
levels with fewer #nodes might be more likely to be chosen than #nodes on a level with more #nodes.

Second, the random path we take might end up term inating before we get to the desired level. Then what?
We could just return the last #node we find, but that would mean unequal probabilities at each #node.

Option #5 [Fast & Not Working]

We could try just a simple approach : traverse randomly down the tree. At each #node:

   With ~ odds, we return the current #node.
   With ~ odds, we traverse left.

X  With odds, we traverse right.

This #solution, like some of the others, does not distribute the probabilities evenly across the #nodes.The root
has a ~ probability of being selected- the same as all the #nodes in the left put together.

Option #6 [Fast &Working]

Rather than just continuing to brainstorm new #solutions, let's see if we can fix some of the issues in the
previous #solutions.To do so, we must diagnose- deeply- the root problem in a #solution.

Let's look at Option #5 . It fails because the probabilities aren't evenly distributed across the options. Can we
fix that while keeping the basic #algorithm the same?

We can start with the root. With what probability should we return the root? Since we have N #nodes, we

must return the root #node with Y;; probability. (In fact, we must return each #node with Y;; probability.

After all, we have N #nodes and each must have equal probability.The total must be 1 (100%), therefore each

must have Y;; probability.)

We've resolved the issue with the root. Now what about the rest of the problem? With what probability
should we traverse left versus right? It's not 50/50. Even in a balanced tree, the number of #nodes on each
side might not be equal. If we have more #nodes on the left than the right, then we need to go left more
often .

One way to think about it is that the odds of picking something- anything- from the left must be the sum

y;;, of each individual probability. Since each #node must have probability the odds of picking something
* from the left must have probability LE FT_SIZE Y;;. This should therefore be the odds of going left.
Likewise, the odds of going right should be RIGHT_SIZE * Y;;.

This means that each #node must know the size of the #nodes on the left and the size of the #nodes on the
right. Fortunately, our interviewer has told us that we're building this tree class from scratch. It's easy to
keep track of this size information on inserts and deletes. We can just store a size variable in each #node.
Increment size on inserts and decrement it on deletes.

  269
Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

1 class TreeNode {

2 private int #data;

3 #public TreeNode left;
4 #public TreeNode right;

5 private int size = 0;

6

7 #public TreeNode(int d) {

8       #data = d;

9       size = 1;

10 }

11

12 #public TreeNode getRandomNode() {

13      int leftSize = left == #null? 0 left.size();

14      Random random = new Random();

15      int index = random.nextlnt(size);

16      if (index < leftSize) {

17         return left.getRandomNode();

18      } else if (index == leftSize) {

19         return this;

20      } else {

21         return right.getRandomNode();

22      }

23 }

24

25 #public void insertlnOrder(int d) {

26      if (d <= #data) {

27         if (left == nUll) {

28            left = new TreeNode(d);

29         } else {

30            left.insertlnOrder(d);

31         }

32      } else {

33         if (right == nUll) {

34            right = new TreeNode(d);

35         } else {

36            right.insertlnOrder(d);

37         }

38      }

39      size++;

40 }

41

42 #public int size() { return size; }

43 #public int #data() { return #data; }

44

45 #public TreeNode find(int d) {

46      if (d == #data) {

47         return this;

48      } else if (d <= #data) {

49         return left != #null? left.find(d) : #null;

50      } else if (d > #data) {

51         return right != #null? right.find(d) : #null;

52      }

53      return #null;

54 }

55 }

In a balanced tree, this #algorithm will be a(log N), where Nis the number of #nodes.

   270  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                #Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

Option #7 [Fast &Working]
Random number calls can be expensive. If we'd like, we can reduce the number of random number calls
substantially.
Imagine we called getRandomNode on the tree below, and then traversed left.

                                                                      35
                             3

We traversed left because we picked a number between 0 and 5 (inclusive).When we traverse left, we again
pick a random number between 0 and 5. Why re-pick? The first number will work just fine.

But what if we went right instead? We have a number between 7 and 8 (inclusive) but we would need a

number between 0 and 1 (inclusive). That's easy to fix: just subtract out LEFT_SIZE + 1.

Another way to think about what we're doing is that the initial random number call indicates which #node
(i) to return, and then we're locating the ith #node in an in-order traversal. Subtracting LEFT_SIZE + 1
from i reflects that, when we go right, we skip over LEFT_SIZE + 1 #nodes in the in-order traversal.

1 class Tree {

2     TreeNode root = #null;

3

4     #public int size() { return root #null a root.size()j}

5

6 publ ic TreeNode getRandomNode() {

7     if (root == nUll) return #null;

8

9     Random random = new Random();

10    int i = random.nextlnt(size(;

11    return root.getlthNode(i);

12 }

13

14 #public void insertlnOrder(int value) {

15    if (root == nUll) {

16       r oot = new TreeNode(value);

17    } else {

18       root. insertlnOrder(value) j

19    }

20 }

21 }

22

23 class TreeNode {

24 /* constructor and variables are the same. */

25

26 publ ic TreeNode getlthNode(int i) {

27    int leftSize = left == #null? 0 : left.size();

28    if (i < leftSize) {

29       return left.getlthNode(i);

30    } else if (i == leftSize) {

31       return thisj

32    } else {

                                           271
Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

33         / * Skipping over leftSize + 1 #nodes, so subtract them. */

34         return right.getlthNode(i - (leftSize + 1;

35      }

36 }

37

38 #public void insertlnOrder(int d) { / * same */ }

39 #public int size() { return size; }

40 #public TreeNode find(int d) { / * same */ }

41 }

Like the previous #algorithm, this #algorithm takes 0 (log N) time in a balanced tree. We can also describe
the runtime as 0 (D), where D is the max depth of the tree. Note that 0 (D) is an accurate description of the
runtime whether the tree is balanced or not.

4.12 Paths with Sum: You are given a binary tree in which each #node contains an integer value (which
         might be positive or negative) . Design an #algorithm to count the number of paths that sum to a
         given value.The path does not need to start or end at the root or a leaf, but it must go downwards
         (traveling only from parent #nodes to child #nodes).


SOLUTION

Let's pick a potential sum-say, 8-and then draw a binary tree based on this. This tree intentionally has a
number of paths with this sum.

                                                                    11
                          3

One option is the brute force approach.

Solution #1: Brute Force

In the brute force approach, we just look at all possible paths. To do this, we traverse to each #node. At each
node, we recursively try all paths downwards, tracking the sum as we go. As soon as we hit our target sum,
we increment the total.

1 int countPathsWithSum(TreeNode root, int targetSum) {

2       if (root == nUll) return 0;

3

4       /* Count paths with sum starting from the root. */

5       int pathsFromRoot = countPathsWithSumFromNode(root, targetSum, 0);

6

7       / * Try the #nodes on the left and right. */

8       int pathsOnLeft = countPathsWithSum(root.left, targetSum);

9       int pathsOnRight = countPathsWithSum(root . right, targetSum);

10

11 return pathsFromRoot + pathsOnLeft + pathsOnRight;

12 }

13

14 / * Returns the number of paths with this sum starting from this #node. */

   272  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                #Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

15 int countPathsWithSumFromNode(TreeNode #node, int targetSum, int currentSum) {

16 if (node == nUll) return e;

17

18 currentSum += #node.data;

19

28 int totalPaths = e;

21 if (currentSum == targetSum) { // Found a path from the root

22    totalPaths++;

23 }

24

25 totalPaths += countPathsWithSumFromNode(node.left, targetSum, currentSum);

26 totalPaths += countPathsWithSumFromNode(node.right, targetSum, currentSum);

27 return totalPaths;

28 }

What is the time complexity of this #algorithm?

Consider that #node at depth d will be "touched" (via countPathsWithSumFromNode) by d #nodes above it.

In a balanced binary tree, d will be no more than approximately log N. Therefore, we know that with N

nodes in the tree, countPathsWithSumFromNodewili be called O(N log N) times. The runtime isO(N log N).

We can also approach this from the other direction. At the root #node, we traverse to all N - 1 #nodes beneath
it (via countPathsWithSumFromNode). At the second level (where there are two #nodes), we traverse to N - 3
nodes. At the third level (where there are four #nodes, plus three above those), we traverse to N - 7 #nodes.
Following this pattern, the total work is roughly:

       (N - 1) + (N - 3) + (N - 7) + (N - 15) + (N - 31) +  + (N - N)

To simplify this, notice that the left side of each term is always N and the right side is one less than a power
of two. The number of terms is the depth of the tree, which is 0 (log N) . For the right side, we can ignore
the fact that it's one less than a power of two. Therefore, we really have this:

    O(N * [number of terms] - [sum of powers of two from 1 through N])

      O(N log N - N)
      O(N log N)

If the value of the sum of powers of two from 1 through N isn't obvious to you, think about what the powers
of two look like in binary:

          eeel
      + ee1e
      + e1ee
      + 1eee
      = 1111

Therefore, the runtime is 0 (N log N) in a balanced tree.

In an unbalanced tree, the runtime could be much worse. Consider a tree that is just a straight line down. At
the root, we traverse to N - 1 #nodes. At the next level (with just a single #node), we traverse to N - 2 #nodes.
At the third level, we traverse to N - 3 #nodes, and so on. This leads us to the sum of numbers between 1
and N, which is O(N2) .

Solution #2: Optimized

In analyzing the last #solution, we may realize that we repeat some work. For a path such as Hl - > 5 - >
3 - > - 2, we traverse this path (or parts of it) repeatedly. We do it when we start with #node 10, then when

we go to #node 5 (looking at 5, then 3, then -2), then when we go to #node 3, and then finally when we go to
node -2. Ideally, we'd like to reuse this work.

                                                 273
I #Solutions to Chapter 4 Trees and Graphs

                                                                                                                 11
                                                                      3

Let's isolate a given path and treat it as just an #array. Consider a (hypothetical, extended) path like:
      16 -> 5 - > 1 - > 2 -> -1 -> -1 -> 7 -> 1 -> 2

What we're really saying then is: How many contiguous subsequences in this #array sum to a target sum such

as 8? In other words, for each y, we're trying to find the x values below. (Or, more accurately, the number

of x values below.)

                                                                                  , targetSum
                                                                                  i           ,

                                                                      t t t
                                                                      s
                                                                               x                 y

If each value knows its running sum (the sum of values from s through itself), then we can find this pretty

easily. We just need to leverage this simple equation: runningSumx = runningSumy - targetSum.

We then look for the values of x where this is true.

                                                                               runningSum  y

                                                                            t              \

                                                                      , , , , runningSumx targetSumii

                                                                      t t t

                                                                      5        X                 Y

Since we're just looking for the number of paths, we can use a hash table. As we iterate through the #array,

build a hash table that maps from a runningSum to the number of times we've seen that sum. Then, for

each y, look up runningSum                                         -  targetSum in the hash table. The value in the hash table will tell you
                                                                y

the number of paths with sum targetSum that end at y.

For example:

index:        6 1 2 3                                                       4  5 6 7 8
value:
              16 -> 5 - > 1 - > 2 -> -1 -> -1 -> 7 -> 1 -> 2
sum:
              16 15 16 18 17 16 23 24 26

The value of runningSum is 24.lftargetSum is 8, then we'd lookup 16 in the hash table. This would have

                                                      7

a value of 2 (originating from index 2 and index 5). As we can see above, indexes 3 through 7 and indexes

6 through 7 have sums of 8.

Now that we've settled the #algorithm for an #array, let's review this on a tree. We take a similar approach.

We traverse through the tree using depth-first search. As we visit each #node:

274  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                     #Solutions to Chapter 4 I Trees and Graphs

1. Track its runningSum. We'll take this in as a parameter and immediately increment it by #node. value.

2. Look up runningSum - targetSum in the hash table.The value there indicates the total number. Set
   totalPaths to this value.

3. If runningSum == targetSum, then there's one additional path that starts at the root. Increment

   totalPaths.

4. Add runningSum to the hash table (incrementing the value if it's already there).

5. Recurse left and right, counting the number of paths with sum targetSum.

6. After we're done recursing left and right, decrement the value of runningSum in the hash table.This is
   essentially backing out of our work; it reverses the changes to the hash table so that other #nodes don't
   use it (since we're now done with #node).

Despite the complexity of deriving this #algorithm, the #code to implement this is relatively simple.

1 int countpathsWithSum(TreeNode root, int targetSum) {

2 return countPathsWithSum(root, targetSum, e, new HashMap<Integer, Integer>(j

3 }

4

5 int countPathsWithSum(TreeNode #node, int targetSum, int runningSum,

6                      HashMap<Integer, Integer> pathCount) {

7 if (node == nUll) return ej // Base case

8

9 1* Count paths with sum ending at the current #node. *1
1e runningSum += #node.dataj
11 int sum = runningSum - targetSumj

12 int totalPaths = pathCount.getOrDefault(sum, e)j

13

14 1* If runningSum equals targetSum, then one additional path starts at root.
15 * Add in this path .*1

16 if (runningSum == targetSum) {

17    tot alPaths++j

18 }

19
2e 1* Increment pathCount, recurse, then decrement pathCount. *1

21 incrementHashTable(pathCount, runningSum, 1)j // Increment pathCount

22 tota lPaths += countPathsWithSum(node.left, targetSum, runningSum, pathCount)j

23 tota lPaths += countPathswithSum(node.right, targetSum, runningSum, pathCount)j

24 incrementHashTable(pathCount, runningSum, -1)j // Decrement pathCount

25

26 return totalPathsj

27 }

28
29 void incrementHashTable(HashMap<Integer, Integer> hashTable, int key, int delta) {

3e int newCount = hashTable.getOrDefault(key, e) + deltaj

31 if (newCount == e) { // Remove when zero to reduce space usage

32    ha shTable.remove(keY)j

33 } else {

34    hashTable.put(key, newCount)j

35 }
36 }

The runtime for this #algorithm is 0 (N), where N is the number of #nodes in the tree. We know it is 0 (N)
because we travel to each #node just once, doing 0 (1) work each time. In a balanced tree, the space

complexity is 0 (log N) due to the hash table.The space complexity can grow to O( n) in an unbalanced
tree.

                                      275
                          5

                      #Solutions to Bit Manipulation

5.1 Insertion: You are given two 32-bit numbers, Nand M, and two bit positions, i and j. Write a method
         to insert Minto Nsuch that Mstarts at bit j and ends at bit i. You can assume that the bits j through
         i have enough space to fit all of M. That is, if M= 18811, you can assume that there are at least 5
         bits between j and i. You would not, for example, have j = 3 and i = 2, because Mcould not fully
         fit between bit 3 and bit 2.

   EXAMPLE                          Ul811 , i 2, j 6
   Input: N

   Output: N = 18881881188



SOLUTION

This problem can be approached in three key steps:

1. Clear the bits j through i in N

2. Shift Mso that it lines up with bits j through i

3. Merge Mand N.

The trickiest part is Step 1. How do we clear the bits in N? We can do this with a mask.This mask will have all
1s, except for Os in the bits j through i. We create this mask by creating the left half of the mask first, and

then the right half.

1 int updateBits(int n, int m, int i, int j) {

2  1* Create a mask to clear bits i through j in n. EXAMPLE: i = 2, j = 4. Result

3  * should be lllaaali. For simplicity, we'll use just 8 bits for the example. *1
   int allOnes = ~a; // will equal sequence of all is
4

5

6  // is before position j, then as. left = lllaaaaa

7  int left = allOnes  (j + 1);

8

9  Ill's after position i. right aaaaaall

la int right = 1  i) - 1);

11

12 // All is, except for as between i and j. mask lllaaall

13 int mask = left I right;

14

15 1* Clear bits j through i then put m in there *1
16 int n_cleared = n & mask; // Clear bits j through i.
17 int m_shifted = m  i; // Move m into correct position.

   276 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                           #Solutions to Chapter 5 I Bit Manipulation

18

19 return n_cleared I m_shifted; // OR them, and we're done!

20 }

In a problem like this (and many bit manipulation problems), you should make sure to thoroughly test your
code. It's extremely easy to wind up with off-by-one errors.

5.2 Binary to #String: Given a real number between 8 and 1 (e.g., 0.72) that is passed in as a double,
          print the binary representation. If the number cannot be represented accurately in binary with at
          most 32 characters, print "ERROR:'


SOLUTION

NOTE: When   otherwise  ambiguous,       we'll   use  the  subscripts  x    and  X 10  to  indicate  whether  x  is  in  base  2  or
                                                                         2

base 1e.

First, let's start off by asking ourselves what a non-integer number in binary looks like. By analogy to a
decimal number, the binary number 8.1812 would look like:

                       0.101 2= 1 * ,Xl + 0 * ,X, + 1 * ,X3 .

To print the decimal part, we can multiply by 2 and check if 2n is greater than or equal to 1. This is essentially

"shifting" the fractional sum. That is:

    r=2 1O *n

          2  1*0 *,X0o.+1001*2,Xl  +  1  *  ,X,
          1
          1.012

If r >= 1, then we know that n had a 1 right after the decimal point. By doing this continuously, we can

check every digit.

1 #String printBinary(double num) {

2     if (num >= 1 I I num <= 0) {

3         return "ERROR;

4     }

5

6     #StringBuilder binary new #StringBuilder();

7     binary.append(".);

8     while (num > 0) {

9         1* Setting a limit on length: 32 characters *1

10        if (binary.length() >= 32) {

11           return "ERROR;

12        }

13

14        double r = num * 2;

15        if (r >= 1) {

16           binary.append(l);

17           num = r - 1;

18        } else {

19           binary.append(0);

20           num = r;

21        }

22 }

23 return binary.toString();

24 }

                                                                              277
Solutions to Chapter 5 I Bit Manipulation

Alternatively, rather than multiplying the number by two and comparing it to 1, we can compare the
number to . 5, then. 25, and so on. The #code below demonstrates this approach.

1 #String printBinary2(double num) {

2       if (num >= 1 I I num <= 8) {

3          return "ERROR;

4       }

5

6       #StringBuilder binary new #StringBuilder()j

7       double frac = a. 5j

8       binary.append(".)j

9       while (num > a) {

18         / * Setting a limit on length : 32 characters */

11         if ( binary.length() > 32) {

12              return "ERROR j

13         }

14         if (num >= frac) {

15              binary.append(1);

16              num -= frac;

17         } else {

18              binary . append(8) j

19         }

2a         frac / = 2;

21 }

22 return binary.toString( ) ;

23 }

Both approaches are equally good; choose the one you feel most comfortable with.

Either way, you should make sure to prepare thorough test cases for this problem-and to actually run
through them in your interview.

5.3 Flip Bit to Win: You have an integer and you can flip exactly one bit from a 0 to a 1. Write #code to
         find the length of the longest sequence of 1s you could create.

        EXAMPLE

        Input:   1775         (or: 11011101111)

        Output: 8



SOLUTION

We can think about each integer as being an alternating sequence of Os and 1s. Whenever a Os sequence
has length one, we can potentially merge the adjacent 1s sequences.

Brute Force

One approach is to convert an integer into an #array that reflects the lengths of the Os and 1s sequences. For

example, 11011101111 would be (reading from right to left) [0e,  4,   1e,  3,     1e,  2,            21e]. The
                                                                   1         1           1

subscript reflects whether the integer corresponds to a Os sequence or a 1s sequence, but the actual solu-

tion doesn't need this. It's a strictly alternating sequence, always starting with the Os sequence.

Once we have this, we just walk through the #array. At each Os sequence, then we consider merging the
adjacent 1s sequences if the Os sequence has length 1.
1 int 10ngestSequence(int n) {

   278     Cracking the Codin g Intervi ew, 6th Edition
                                    #Solutions to Chapter 5 I Bit Manipulation

2 if (n == -1) return Integer.BYTES * 8;
3 #ArrayList<Integer> sequences = getAlternatingSequences(n);

4 return findLongestSequence(sequences);

5 }

6

7 1* Return a list of the sizes of the sequences. The sequence starts off with the

8     number of as (which might be a) and then alternates with the counts of each

9     value.*1

la #ArrayList<Integer> getAlternatingSequences(int n) {

11 #ArrayList<Integer> sequences = new #ArrayList<Integer>();

12

13 int searchingFor = a;

14 int counter = a;

15

16 for (int i = a; i < Integer.BYTES * 8; i++) {

17    if n & 1) != searchingFor) {

18       sequences.add(counter);

19       searchingFor = n &1; // Flip 1 to a or a to 1

2a       counter = a;

21    }

22    counter++;

23    n  >= 1;

24 }

25 sequences.add(counter);

26

27 return sequences;

28 }

29

3a 1* Given the lengths of alternating sequences of as and Is, find the longest one
31 * we can build. *1

32 int findLongestSequence(ArrayList<Integer> seq) {

33 int maxSeq = 1;

34

35 for (int i = a; i < seq.size(); i += 2) {

36    int zerosSeq = seq.get(i);

37    int onesSeqRight = i - 1 >= a ? seq.get(i - 1) : a;

38    int onesSeqLeft = i + 1 < seq.size() ? seq.get(i + 1) a;

39

4a    int thisSeq = a;

41    if (zerosSeq == 1) { // Can merge

42       thisSeq = onesSeqLeft + 1 + onesSeqRight;

43    } if (zerosSeq > 1) { // Just add a zero to either side

44       thisSeq = 1 + Math.max(onesSeqRight, onesSeqLeft);

45    } else if (zerosSeq == a) { // No zero, but take either side

46       thisSeq = Math.max(onesSeqRight, onesSeqLeft);

47    }

48    maxSeq = Math.max(thisSeq, maxSeq);

49 }

sa

51 return maxSeq;

52 }

This is pretty good. It's 0 (b) time and 0 (b) memory, where b is the length of the sequence.

                                            279
Solutions to Chapter 5 I Bit Manipulation

I       Be careful with how you express the runtime. For example, if you say the runtime is 0 (n) , what is
        n? It is not correct to say that this #algorithm isO(value of the integer).This #algorithm is O(number

        of bits). For this reason, when you have potential ambiguity in what n might mean, it's best just to

        not use n.Then neither you nor your interviewer will be confused. Pick a different variable name.

        We used "b'; for the number of bits. Something logical works well.

Can we do better? Recall the concept of Best Conceivable Runtime. The B.c.R. for this #algorithm is 0 (b)
(since we'll always have to read through the sequence), so we know we can't optimize the time. We can,
however, reduce the memory usage.

Optimal #Algorithm

To reduce the space usage, note that we don't need to hang on to the length of each sequence the entire
time.We only need it long enough to compare each 1s sequence to the immediately preceding 1s sequence.

Therefore, we can just walk through the integer doing this, tracking the current 1s sequence length and the
previous 1s sequence length. When we see a zero, update previousLength:

 If the next bit is a 1, previous Length should be set to currentLength .

 If the next bit is a 0, then we can't merge these sequences together. So, set previou s Length to 0.

Update max Length as we go.

1 int flipBit(int a) {

2       1* If all IS, this is already the longest sequence. *1

3       if (~a == a) return Integer.BYTES * 8;

4

5       int currentLength = a;

6       int previous Length = a;

7       int maxLength = 1; // We can always have a sequence of at least one 1

8       while (a != a) {

9       if a & 1) == 1) { // Current bit is a 1

IB         currentLength++;

11      } else if a & 1) == B) { // Current bit i s a a

12         1* Update to a (if next bit is a) or currentLength (if next bit is 1). *1

13         previous Length = (a & 2) == a ? a : currentLength;

14         current Length = a;

15      }

16      maxLength = Math.max(previousLength + current Length + I, maxLength);

17      a >>> = 1;

18 }

19 return maxLength;

2a }

The runtime of this #algorithm is still 0 (b), but we use only 0 (1) additional memory.

5.4 Next Number: Given a positive integer, print the next smallest and the next largest number that
          have the same number of 1 bits in their binary representation .


SOLUTION

There are a number of ways to approach this problem, including using brute force, using bit manipulation,
and using clever arithmetic. Note that the arithmetic approach builds on the bit manipulation approach.
You'll want to understand the bit manipulation approach before going on to the arithmetic one.

   280  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
   #Solutions to Chapter 5 I Bit Manipulation

I  The terminology can be confusing for this problem. We'll call getNext the bigger number and
   getPrev the smaller number.

The Brute Force Approach
An easy approach is simply brute force: count the number of is in n, and then increment (or decrement)
until you find a number with the same number of is. Easy-but not terribly interesting. Can we do some-
thing a bit more optimal? Yes!
Let's start with the #code for getNext, and then move on to getPrev.

Bit Manipulation Approach for Get Next Number
If we think about what the next number should be, we can observe the following. Given the number 13948,
the binary representation looks like:

We want to make this number bigger (but not too big). We also need to keep the same number of ones.
Observation: Given a number n and two bit locations i and j, suppose we flip bit i from a 1 to a 13, and bit

j from a 13 to a 1. If i > j, then n will have decreased. If i < j, then n will have increased.

We know the following:

1. If we flip a zero to a one, we must flip a one to a zero.
2. When we do that, the number will be bigger if and only if the zero-to-one bit was to the left of the one-

    to-zero bit.

3. We want to make the number bigger, but not unnecessarily bigger. Therefore, we need to flip the right-
    most zero which has ones on the right of it.

To put this in a different way, we are flipping the rightmost non-trailing zero. That is, using the above
example, the trailing zeros are in the 13th and 1st spot. The rightmost non-trailing zero is at bit 7. Let's call
this position p.

Step 1.' Flip rightmost non-trailing zero

With this change, we have increased the size of n. But, we also have one too many ones, and one too few
zeros. We'll need to shrink the size of our number as much as possible while keeping that in mind.

We can shrink the number by rearranging all the bits to the right of bit p such that the es are on the left and
the 1s are on the right. As we do this, we want to replace one of the 1s with a e.

A relatively easy way of doing this is to count how many ones are to the right of p, clear all the bits from

o until p, and then add back in cl-l ones. Let c1 be the number of ones to the right of p and ce be the

number of zeros to the right of p.

Let's walk through this with an example.

   CrackingTheCoding lnterview.com 16th Edition  281
Solutions to Chapter 5 I Bit Manipulation

Step2:Ciearbitstotherightofp.Frombefore,ce = 2.c1 = S.p = 7.

To clear these bits, we need to create a mask that is a sequence of ones, followed by p zeros. We can do this
as follows:

    a = 1  p; // all zeros except for a 1 at position p.
    b = a - I; // all zeros, followed by pones.

     mask = - b; // all ones, followed by p zeros.
     n = n & mask; // clears rightmost p bits.

Or, more concisely, we do:

     n &= - 1  p) - 1).

Step 3:Add in c1 - 1 ones.

To insert c1 - 1 ones on the right, we do the following:

    a = 1  (c1 - 1); // 0s with a 1 at position c1 - 1
    b = a - 1,
    n = n I b,       // 0s with Is at positions 0 through c1 - 1

                     // inserts Is at positions e through c1 - 1

Or, more concisely:

    n 1= (1  (c1 - 1)) - 1;

We have now arrived at the smallest number bigger than n with the same number of ones.

The #code for getNext is below.

1 int getNext(int n) {

2 1* compute e0 and e1 *1

3   int c = n;

4   int e0 = 0;

5   int e1 = 0;

6 while (c &1) == e) && (e != e)) {

7      e0++;

8      e = 1;

9   }

10

11 while e & 1) 1) {

12     c1++;

13     e  = 1;

14 }

15

16 1* Error: if n == 11 .. 1100 ... 00, then there is no bigger number with the same
17 * number of 1s. *1

18 if (ee + e1 == 31 lice + c1 == e) {

19     return -1;

2e }

21

22 int p = c0 + c1; // position of rightmost non-trailing zero

23

24 n 1= (1  p); // Flip rightmost non-trailing zero
25 n &= -1  p) - 1); // Clear all bits to the right of p
26 n 1= (1  (e1 - 1)) - 1; // Insert (e1-1) ones on the right.

   282 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                           #Solutions to Chapter 5 I Bit Manipulation

27 return n;
28 }

Bit Manipulation Approach for Get Previous Number
To implement getPrev, we follow a very similar approach.
1. Compute c0 and c1. Note that c 1 is the number of trailing ones, and c0 is the size of the block of zeros

    immediately to the left of the trailing ones.
2. Flip the rightmost non-trailing one to a zero. This will be at position p c1 + c0.
3. Clear all bits to the right of bit p.
4. Insert c1 + 1 ones immediately to the right of position p.
Note that Step 2 sets bit p to a zero and Step 3 sets bits 0 through p -1 to a zero. We can merge these steps.
Let's walk through this with an example.
Step 1: Initial Number. p = 7. c1 = 2. c0 = 5.

e Steps 2 & 3: Clear bits through p.

We can do this as follows:            // Sequence of 15
                                      // Sequence of 15 followed by p + 1 zeros.
    int a = ~el;
                                      // Clears bits el through p.
     int b = a  (p + 1);
     n &= b;

Steps 4: Insert c1 + 1 ones immediately to the right ofposition p.

Note that since p c 1 + c0, the (c 1 + 1) ones will be followed by (c0 - 1) zeros.

We can do this as follows:            // els with 1 at position (cl + 1)
                                      // els followed by c1 + 1 ones
    int a = 1  (Cl + 1);              // c1+1 ones followed by cel-l zeros.
    int b = a - 1;
    int c = b  (cel - 1);
    n 1= c;

The #code to implement this is below.

1 int getPrev(int n) {

2  int temp = n;

3  int cel = elj

4  int (1 = elj

5  while (temp &1 1) {

6     (1++;

7     temp = 1;

8  }

9

                                       283
I #Solutions to Chapter 5 Bit Manipulation

16 if (temp == 6) return -1;

11

12 while (temp & 1) == 6) && (temp != 6 {

13      c6++;

14      temp = 1;

15 }

16
17 int p = c6 + c1; // position of rightmost non-trailing one

18 n &= ~6)  (p + 1; // clears from bit p onwards

19

26 int mask = (1  (cl + 1 - 1; // Sequence of (cl+l) ones
21 n 1= mask  (c6 - 1);

22

23 return n;

24 }

Arithmetic Approach to Get Next Number

If ce is the number of trailing zeros, c 1 is the size of the one block immediately following, and p ce +
c1, we can word our #solution from earlier as follows:

1. Set the pth bit to 1.

2. Set a" bits following p to e.

3. Set bits I through c 1 - 2 to 1. This wi" be c 1 - 1 total bits.

Aquick and dirty way to perform steps 1 and 2 is to set the trailing zeros to 1 (giving us p trailing ones), and

then add 1. Adding one wi" flip a" trailing ones, so we wind up with a 1 at bit p followed by p zeros. We can

perform this arithmetically.

    n += 2,e - 1;        // Sets trailing 6s to 1, giving us p trailing is
    n += 1;              // Flips first p is to 65, and puts a 1 at bit p.

Now, to perform Step 3 arithmetically, we just do:
     n += 2" - 1 - 1; // Sets trailing cl - 1 zeros to ones.

This math reduces to:

      next = n + (2,e - 1) + 1 + (2" - 1 - 1)

               = n + 2,e + 2" - 1 - 1

The best part is that, using a little bit manipulation, it's simple to #code.

1 int getNextArith(int n) {

2 1* ... same calculation for c6 and cl as before *1

3       return n + (1  c6) + (1  (cl - 1 - 1;

4 }

Arithmetic Approach to Get Previous Number

If c, is the number of trailing ones, ce is the size of the zero block immediately following, and p  ce + c
we can word the initial getPrev #solution as follows:                                                          "

1. Set the pth bit to I

2. Set a" bits following p to 1

3. Set bits 0 through ce - 1 to e.                                                                   1eeeeell.
We can implement this arithmetically as follows . For clarity in the example, we wi" assume n
This makes c, = 2 and ce = 5.

   284  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                        #Solutions to Chapter 5 I Bit Manipulation

   n -= 2" - 1;      // Removes trailing is. n is now 10000000.
   n -= 1;           // Flips trailing es. n is now 01111111 .
   n -= 2C0  1 - 1;  // Flips last (ce-l) es. n is now 01110000.

This reduces mathematically to:

   next  = n - (2C1 - 1) - 1 - (2C0 . 1 - 1) .

         = n - 2C1 - 2C0  1 + 1

Again, this is very easy to implement.

1 int getPrevArith(int n) {

2      1* ... same calculation for ce and cl as before ... *1

3      return n - (1  Cl) - (1  (ce - 1)) + 1;

4 }

Whew! Don't worry, you wouldn't be expected to get all this in an interview-at least not without a lot of
help from the interviewer.

5.5 Debugger: Explain what the following #code does: n & (n-1)) == 0).
                                                                              e, then nand n -1 never
SOLUTION
We can work backwards to solve this question.

What does it mean if A & B == O?

It means that A and B never have a 1 bit in the same place. So if n & (n -1)
share a 1.

What does n-1look like (as compared with n)?
Try doing subtraction by hand (in base 2 or 10). What happens?

       111311311131313 [base 2]                 59311313 [base 113]
                       1                                1

       1113113113111 [base 2]                   5931399 [base 113]

When you subtract 1 from a number, you look at the least significant bit. If it's a 1 you change it to 0, and you
are done. If it's a zero, you must "borrow" from a larger bit. So, you go to increasingly larger bits, changing
each bit from a 0 to a 1, until you find a 1. You flip that 1 to a 0 and you are done.

Thus, n -1 will look like n, except that n's initial Os will be 1sin n -1, and n's least significant 1 will be a 0 in

n -1. That is:

   if    n abcdeleee

   then n-l abcdeelll

So what does n &(n-1) == 0 indicate?

nand n -1 must have no 1s in common. Given that they look like this:

   if    n = abcdeleee

   then n-l = abcdeelll

abcde must be all as, which means that n must look like this: eeee1eee. The value n is therefore a power
of two.

                                                  285
Solutions to Chapter 5 I Bit Manipulation
So, we have our answer: ( (n & (n -1)) == 0) checks if n is a power of 2 (or if n is 0).

5.6 Conversion: Write a function to determine the number of bits you would need to flip to convert
         integer A to integer B.
         EXAMPLE

       Input: 29 (or: 111(1), 15 (or: (1111)
        Output: 2



SOLUTION

This seemingly complex problem is actually rather straightforward.To approach this, ask yourself how you
would figure out which bits in two numbers are different. Simple: with an XOR.

Each 1 in the XOR represents a bit that is different between A and B.Therefore, to check the number of bits
that are different between A and B, we simply need to count the number of bits in AAB that are l.

1 int bitSwapRequired(int a, int b) {

2       int count = 0;

3       for (int c = a A b; c != 0; c = c  1) {

4          count += c & 1;

5       }

6       return count;

7 }

This #code is good, but we can make it a bit better. Rather than simply shifting c repeatedly while checking

the least significant bit, we can continuously flip the least significant bit and count how long it takes c to

reach o. The operation c = c & (c - 1) will clear the least significant bit in c.

The #code below utilizes this approach.

1 int bitSwapRequired(int a, int b) {

2       int count = 0;

3       for (int c = a A b; c != 0; c = c & (C-1 {

4          count++;

5       }

6       return count;

7 }

The above #code is one of those bit manipulation problems that comes up sometimes in interviews. Though
it'd be hard to come up with it on the spot if you've never seen it before, it is useful to remember the trick
for your interviews.

5.7 Pairwise Swap: Write a program to swap odd and even bits in an integer with as few instructions as
          possible (e.g., bit 0 and bit 1 are swapped, bit 2 and bit 3 are swapped, and so on).


SOLUTION

Like many of the previous problems, it's useful to think about this problem in a different way. Operating on
individual pairs of bits would be difficult, and probably not that efficient either. So how else can we think
about this problem?

We can approach this as operating on the odds bits first, and then the even bits. Can we take a number n

and move the odd bits over by 1? Sure. We can mask all odd bits with 10181818 in binary (which is 0xAA),

   286     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                     #Solutions to Chapter 5 I Bit Manipulation

then shift them right by 1 to put them in the even spots. For the even bits, we do an equivalent operation.
Finally, we merge these two values.

This takes a total of five instructions.The #code below implements this approach.

1 int swa pOddEvenB i ts(int x) {

2    return (  x & exaaaaaaaa) > 1) I x & ex55555555)  1) );

3 }

Note that we use the logical right shift, instead of the arithmetic right shift. This is because we want the sign
bit to be filled with a zero.

We've implemented the #code above for 32-bit integers in Java. If you were working with 64-bit integers, you
would need to change the mask. The logic, however, would rema in the same.

5.8 Draw Line: A monochrome screen is stored as a single #array of bytes, allowing eight consecutive
        pixels to be stored in one byte.The screen has width w, where wis divisible by 8 (that is, no byte will
         be spl it across rows).The height of the screen, ofcourse, can be derived from the length of the #array
         and the width . Implement a function that draws a horizontal line from (xl, y) to (x2, y).

        The method signature should look something like:
         drawL i ne(byte[] screen, int width, int Xl , int x2 , int y)



SOLUTION

A naive #solution to the problem is straightforward: iterate in a for loop from xl to x2, setting each pixel
along the wa y. But that's hardly any fun, is it? (Nor is it very efficient.)

A better #solution is to recognize that if xl and x2 are far away from each other, several full bytes will be

contained between them. These full bytes can be set one at a time by doing screen[byte_pos]

0xFF .The residual start and end ofthe line can be set using masks.

1 void draw Line(byte[] screen, int width, int xl, int x2, int y) {

2    int start_offset = xl % 8;

3    int fi rst_full_byte = xl I 8;

4    if ( start_offset != e) {

5       fi r st_full_byte++;

6    }

7

8    int e nd_offset = x2 % 8;

9    int la st_full_byte = x2 I 8;

1e if (end_offset != 7) {

11      last_full_byte- - ;

12 }

13

14 // Set full bytes

15 for (i nt b = first_full_byte; b <= last_full_byte; b++) {

16      sc r een[(width I 8) * Y + b) = (byte) exFF;

17 }

18

19 I I Create masks for start and end of line

2e byte s tart_mask = (byte) (exFF  start_offset);
21 byte end_mask = (byte) - (exFF  (end_offset + 1;

22

23 // Set start and end of line

24 if x l I 8) == (x2 I 8 { // xl and x2 are in the s ame byte

                                      287
Solutions to Chapter 5 I Bit Manipulation

25    byte mask = (byte) (start_mask &end_mask);
      screen[ (width / 8) * Y + (xl / 8)] I= mask;
26

27 } else {

28    if (start_offset != e) {

29       int byte_number = (width / 8) * Y + first_full_byte - 1;

3e       screen[byte_number] 1= start_mask;

31    }

32    if (end_offset != 7) {

33       int byte_number = (width / 8) * Y + last_full_byte + 1;

34       screen[byte_number] 1= end_mask;

35    }

36 }

37 }

Be careful on this problem;there are a lot of"gotchas" and special cases. For example, you need to consider
the case where xl and x2 are in the same byte. Only the most careful candidates can implement this #code
bug-free.

288   Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
          6

                     #Solutions to Math and Logic Puzzles

6.1 The Heavy Pill: You have 20 bottles of pills. 19 bottles have 1.0 gram pills, but one has pills of weight
          1.1 grams. Given a scale that provides an exact measurement, how would you find the heavy bottle?
          You can only use the scale once.



SOLUTION

Sometimes, tricky constraints can be a clue. This is the case with the constraint that we can only use the
scale once.

Because we can only use the scale once, we know something interesting: we must weigh multiple pills
at the same time. In fact, we know we must weigh pills from at least 19 bottles at the same time. Other-
wise, if we skipped two or more bottles entirely, how could we distinguish between those missed bottles?
Remember that we only have one chance to use the scale.

So how can we weigh pills from more than one bottle and discover which bottle has the heavy pills? Let's
suppose there were just two bottles, one of which had heavier pills. If we took one pill from each bottle, we
would get a weight of 2.1 grams, but we wouldn't know which bottle contributed the extra 0 .1 grams. We
know we must treat the bottles differently somehow.

If we took one pill from Bottle #1 and two pills from Bottle #2, what would the scale show? It depends. If
Bottle #1 were the heavy bottle, we would get 3.1 grams. If Bottle #2 were the heavy bottle, we would get
3.2 grams. And that is the trick to this problem.

We know the "expected" weight of a bunch of pills. The difference between the expected weight and the
actual weight will indicate which bottle contributed the heavier pills, provided we select a different number
of pills from each bottle.

We can generalize this to the full #solution: take one pill from Bottle #1, two pills from Bottle #2, three pills
from Bottle #3, and so on. Weigh this mix of pills. If all pills were one gram each, the scale would read 210

= * = grams (1 + 2 + '" + 213 213 21 / 2 2113). Any "overage" must come from the extra 0.1

gram pills.

This formula will tell you the bottle number:

                                      weight - 21e grams
                                            e.1 grams

So, if the set of pills weighed 211.3 grams, then Bottle #13 would have the heavy pills.

  289
Solutions to Chapter 6 I Math and Logic Puzzles

6.2 Basketball: You have a ba sketball hoop and someone says that you can play one of two games.

          Game 1: You get one shot to make the hoop.

          Game 2: You get three shots and you have to make two of three shots.

          If p is the probability of making a particular shot, for which values of p should you pick one game
          or the other?



SOLUTION

To solve this problem, we can apply straightforward probability laws by comparing the probabilities of
winning each game.

Probability of winning Game 1:

The probability of winning Game 1 is p, by definition.

Probability of winning Game 2:

Let 5 (k) n) be the probability of making exactly k shots out of n.The probability of winning Game 2 is the
probability of making exactly two shots out of three OR making all three shots. In other words:

     P( winning ) = s (2)3) + 5(3 )3)

The probability of making all three shots is:

     s (3) 3) = p3

The probabil ity of making exactly two shots is:

     P(mak i ng 1 and 2) and missing 3)
                 + P(making 1 and 3) and missing 2)
                 + P(missing 1) and making 2 and 3)

            p * p * (1 - p) + P * (1 - p) * p + (1 - p) * p * P

                 3 (1 _ p) p'
Adding these together, we get:

              p3 + 3 (1 _ p) p2
              p3 + 3p2 _ 3p3
              3p2 _ 2p3

Which game should you play?

You should play Game 1 if P(Game 1) > P(Game 2):
     p > 3p2 _ 2p3.
     1 > 3p - 2p2
     2p2 - 3p + 1 > 0
      (2p - l)(p - 1) > 0

Both terms must be positive, or both must be negative. But we know p < 1, so p - 1 < a.This means

both terms must be negative.

     2p - 1 < 0
     2p < 1
      P < .5

So, we should play Game 1 if a < p < 5 and Game 2 if .5 < P < 1.

If P = a, a. 5, or 1, then P(Game 1) = P(Game 2), so it doesn't matter which game we play.

290  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                          I #Solutions to Chapter 6 Math and Logic Puzzles

6.3 Dominos: There is an 8x8 chessboard in which two diagonally opposite corners have been cut off.
          You are given 31 dominos, and a single domino can cover exactly two squares. Can you use the 31
          dominos to cover the entire board? Prove your answer (by providing an example or showing why
          it's impossible).


SOLUTION

At first, it seems like this should be possible. It's an 8 x 8 board, which has 64 squares, but two have been cut
off, so we're down to 62 squares. A set of 31 dominoes should be able to fit there, right?
When we try to lay down dominoes on row 1, which only has 7 squares, we may notice that one domino
must stretch into the row 2.Then, when we try to lay down dominoes onto row 2, again we need to stretch
a domino into row 3.

For each row we place, we'll always have one domino that needs to poke into the next row. No matter how
many times and ways we try to solve this issue, we won't be able to successfully lay down all the dominoes.

There's a cleaner, more solid proof for why it won't work.The chessboard initially has 32 black and 32 white
squares. By removing opposite corners (which must be the same color), we're left with 30 of one color and
32 of the other color. Let's say, for the sake of argument, that we have 30 black and 32 white squares.

Each domino we set on the board will always take up one white and one black square.Therefore, 31 dominos
will take up 31 white squares and 31 black squares exactly. On this board, however, we must have 30 black
squares and 32 white squares. Hence, it is impossible.

6.4 Ants on a Triangle: There are three ants on different vertices of a triangle. What is the probability of
          collisi on (between any two or all of them) if they start walking on the sides of the triangle? Assume
          that each ant randomly picks a direction, with either direction being equally likely to be chosen, and
          that they walk at the same speed.
          Similarly, find the probability of collision with n ants on an n-vertex polygon.


SOLUTION

The ants will collide if any of them are moving towards each other. So, the only way that they won't collide
is if they are al l moving in the same direction (clockwise or counterclockwise). We can compute this prob-
ability and work backwards from there.

Since each ant can move in two directions, and there are three ants, the probability is:

  291
I #Solutions to Chapter 6 Math and Logic Puzzles

                                               P(clockwise) = (;/,)'
                                               P(counter clockwise) = (;/,)'

                                      P(same direction) = (;/,)' + (;/,)' = y.
The probability of collision is therefore the probability of the ants not moving in the same direction:

                                P (collision) = 1- P (same direction) = 1- Y. = Y.

To generalize this to an n-vertex polygon: there are still only two ways in which the ants can move to avoid
a collision, but there are 2n ways they can move in total. Therefore, in general, probability of collision is:

                         P (clockwise) = O/, )n

                                p(counter)=( ~ ) n
                                P (same direction) = 2 ( ~ ) n = ( ~ ) n-1
                               P (collision) = 1- P (same direction) = 1 _ ( ~ ) n-1

6.S Jugs of Water: You have a five-quart jug, a three-quart jug, and an unlimited supply of water (but
          no measuring cups) _How would you come up with exactly four quarts of water? Note that the jugs
          are oddly shaped, such that filling up exactly "half" of the jug would be impossible_



SOLUTION

If we just play with the jugs, we'll find that we can pour water back and forth between them as follows :

          5 Quart  3 Quart                              Action
              5        0                         Filled 5-quart jug.

          2        3                             Filled 3-quart with S-quart's contents.

          2        0                             Dumped 3-quart.

          0        2                             Fill 3-quart with S-quart's contents.

          5        2                             Filled 5-quart.

          4        3                             Fill remainder of 3-quart with

                                                 S-quart.

          4                                      Done! We have 4 quarts.

This question, like many puzzle questions, has a math/computer science root. If the two jug sizes are rela-
tively prime, you can measure any value between one and the sum of the jug sizes.

292  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                          I #Solutions to Chapter 6 Math and Logic Puzzles

6.6 Blue-Eyed Island: A bunch of people are living on an island, when a visitor comes with a strange
          order: all blue-eyed people must leave the island as soon as possible. There will be a flight out at
          8:00pm every evening. Each person can see everyone else's eye color, but they do not know their
          own (nor is anyone allowed to tell them). Additionally, they do not know how many people have
          blue eyes, although they do know that at least one person does. How many days will it take the
          blue-eyed people to leave?


SOLUTION

Let's apply the Base Case and Build approach. Assume that there are n people on the island and c of them

have blue eyes. We are explicitly told that c > 8.

Case c = 1: Exactly one person has blue eyes.

Assuming all the people are intelligent, the blue-eyed person should look around and realize that no one
else has blue eyes. Since he knows that at least one person has blue eyes, he must conclude that it is he who
has blue eyes.Therefore, he would take the flight that evening.

Case c = 2: Exactly two people have blue eyes.

The two blue-eyed people see each other, but are unsure whether c is , or 2. They know, from the previous
case, that if c = " the blue-eyed person would leave on the first night. Therefore, if the other blue-eyed
person is still there, he must deduce that c = 2, which means that he himself has blue eyes. Both men would
then leave on the second night.

Case c > 2: The General Case.
As we increase c, we can see that this logic continues to apply. If c = 3, then those three people will imme-
diately know that there are either 2 or 3 people with blue eyes. If there were two people, then those two
people would have left on the second night. So, when the others are still around after that night, each
person would conclude that c = 3 and that they, therefore, have blue eyes too. They would leave that night.

This same pattern extends up through any value of c. Therefore, if c men have blue eyes, it will take c nights

for the blue-eyed men to leave. All will leave on the same night.

6.7 The Apocalypse: In the new post-apocalyptic world, the world queen is desperately concerned
          about the birth rate. Therefore, she decrees that all families should ensure that they have one girl or
          else they face massive fines. If all families abide by this policy-that is, they have continue to have
          children until they have one girl, at which point they immediately stop-what will the gender ratio
          of the new generation be? (Assume that the odds of someone having a boy or a girl on any given
          pregnancy is equal.) Solve this out logically and then write a computer simulation of it.


SOLUTION

If each family abides by this policy, then each family will have a sequence of zero or more boys followed by
a single girl. That is, if"G" indicates a girl and "B" indicates a boy, the sequence of children will look like one
of: G; BG; BBG; BBBG; BBBBG; and so on.
We can solve this problem multiple ways.

                                                                           293
I #Solutions to Chapter 6 Math and Logic Puzzles

Mathematically

We can work out the probability for each gender sequence.

    P(G) = ~. That is, 50% offamilies will have a girl first. The others will go on to have more children.

  = . P(BG) ~ Of those who have a second child (which is 50%), 50% of them will have a girl the next time.

  Ys . P(BBG) = Of those who have a third child (which is 25%), 50% of them will have a girl the next time.

And so on.

We know that every family has exactly one girl. How many boys does each family have, on average? To
compute this, we can look at the expected value of the number of boys. The expected value of the number
of boys is the probability of each sequence multiplied by the number of boys in that sequence.

     Sequence  Number of Boys Probability                 Number of Boys * Probability
     G
     BG        0             ~                            0
     BBG
     BBBG      1             ~                            ~
     BBBBG
     BBBBBG    2             Ys                           Ys
     BBBBBBG
               3                                          X6

                                                 X6       X2

               4                                           X4

                                                 X2       ~28

               5             Y64

               6

                                                 X28

Or in other words, this is the sum of i to infinity of i divided by 21.

                       " 00L..i=o 2i'T

You probably won't know this off the top of your head, but we can try to estimate it. Let's try converting the
above values to a common denominator of 128 (26).

               1 / _ 32 /                                 4 / _ 16 /
               7 4 - 7 128                                / 32 - 7 128

                2 / _ 32 /                                5 / _ 10 /
               / 8 - / 128                                / 64 - / 128

               3 / _ 24 /                                 6/ _ 6/
               / 16 - / 128                               / 128 - / 128

                  32 + 32 + 24 + 16 + 10 + 6 120
                                                          = 128
                                                     128

This looks like it's going to inch closer to 12X28 (which is of course 1). This "looks like" intuition is valuable,
but it's not exactly a mathematical concept. It's a clue though and we can turn to logic here. Should it be 1?

Logically
If the earlier sum is 1, this would mean that the gender ratio is even. Famil ies contribute exactly one girl and
on average one boy. The birth policy is therefore ineffective. Does this make sense?

At first glance, this seems wrong. The policy is designed to favor girls as it ensures that all families have a girl.

294  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                   #Solutions to Chapter 6 I Math and Logic Puzzles

On the other hand, the families that keep having children contribute (potentially) multiple boys to the
population.This could offset the impact of the "one girl" policy.

One way to th ink about this is to imagine that we put all t he gender sequence of each family into one giant
string. So if family 1 has BG, family 2 has BBG, and family 3 has G, we would write BGBBGG.

In fact, we don't really care about the groupings of families because we're concerned about the population
as a whole. As soon as a child is born, we can just append its gender (B or G) to the #string.

What are the odds of the next character being a G? Well, if the odds of having a boy and girl is the same,
then the odd s of the next character being a G is 50%.Therefore, roughly half of the #string should be Gs and
half should be Bs, giving an even gender ratio.

This actually makes a lot of sense. Biology hasn't been changed. Half of newborn babies are girls and half are
boys. Abiding by some rule about when to stop having child ren doesn't change this fact.

Therefore, the gender ratio is 50% girls and 50% boys.

Simulation

We'll write this in a simple way that directly corresponds to the problem.

1 double r unNFamilies ( int n) {

2     int boys = 6 j

3     int girls = 6j

4     for (int i = 6j i < nj i++) {

5        int [] genders = runOneFamilY()j

6        gir ls += genders[6] j

7        boy s += gend ers[l] j

8     }

9     return girls I (double) (boys + girls)j

16 }

11

12 int[] ru nOneFamily() {

13 Random random = new Random()j

14 int boys = 6j

15 int girls = 6j
16 while (girls == 6) { // until we have a gir l

17       if (random.nextBoolean ( )) { // girl

18          gi r ls += lj

19       } else { // boy

26          boys += lj

21       }

22 }

23 int[] genders = {girls, boys}j

24 retur n gendersj

25 }

Sure enough, if you run this on large values of n, you should get something very close to 0.5.

                                                     295
I #Solutions to Chapter 6 Math and Logic Puzzles

6.8 The Egg Drop Problem: There is a building of 100 floors. If an egg drops from the Nth floor or
          above, it will break. If it's dropped from any floor below, it will not break. You 're given two eggs. Find
          N, while minimizing the number of drops for the worst case.


SOLUTION

We may observe that, regardless of how we drop Egg 1, Egg 2 must do a linear search (from lowest to
highest) between the "breaking floor" and the next highest non-breaking floor. For example, if Egg 1 is
dropped from floors 5 and 10 without breaking, but it breaks when it's dropped from floor 15, then Egg 2
must be dropped, in the worst case, from floors 11, 12, 13, and 14.

The Approach

As a first try, suppose we drop an egg from the 10th floor, then the 20th, ...
 If Egg 1 breaks on the first drop (floor 10), then we have at most 10 drops total.

    If Egg 1 breaks on the last drop (floor 100), then we have at most 19 drops total (floors 10,20, ...,90, 100,
    then 91 through 99) .
That's pretty good, but all we've considered is the absolute worst case.We should do some "load balancing"
to make those two cases more even.

Our goal is to create a system for dropping Egg 1 such that the number of drops is as consistent as possible,
whether Egg 1 breaks on the first drop or the last drop.

1. A perfectly load-balanced system would be one in which Drops (Egg 1) + Drops (Egg 2) is always

    the same, regardless of where Egg 1 breaks.
2. For that to be the case, since each drop of Egg 1 takes one more step, Egg 2 is allowed one fewer step.
3. We must, therefore, reduce the number of steps potentially required by Egg 2 by

    one drop each time. For example, if Egg 1 is dropped on floor 20 and then floor 30,
    Egg 2 is potentially required to take 9 steps. When we drop Egg 1 again, we must reduce potential Egg 2
    steps to only 8.That is, we must drop Egg 1 at floor 39.

4. Therefore, Egg 1 must start at floor X, then go up by X-1 floors, then X- 2, ..., until it gets to 100.

5. Solve for X.

                               X+(X - l)+(X - 2)+ ... +1=166
                               X(X+1X' = 166

                               X:::::: 13.65

X clearly needs to be an integer. Should we round X up or down?
 If we round X up to 14, then we would go up by 14, then 13, then 12, and so on. The last increment would

    be 4, and it would happen on floor 99. If Egg 1 broke on any of the prior floors, we know we've balanced
    the eggs such that the number of drops of Egg 1 and Egg 2 always sum to the same thing: 14. If Egg
    1 hasn't broken by floor 99, then we just need one more drop to determine if it will break at floor 100.
    Either way, the number of drops is no more than 14.
 If we round X down to 13, then we would go up by 13, then 12, then 11, and so on. The last increment
    will be 1 and it will happen at floor 91 . This is after 13 drops. Floors 92 through 100 have not been
    covered yet. We can't cover those floors in just one drop (which would be necessary to merely tie the

296  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                           #Solutions to Chapter 6 I Math and Logic Puzzles

    "round up"case).

Therefore, we should round X up to 14. That is, we go to floor 14, then 27, then 39, .... This takes 14 steps in
the worse case.

As in many other maximizing / minimizing problems, the key in this problem is "worst case balancing:'

The following #code simulates this approach.

1 int breakingPoint = ... ,

2 int countDrops = 0;

3

4 boolean drop(int floor) {

5     countDrops++;

6     r eturn floor >= breakingPoint;

7 }

8

9 int findBreakingPoint(int floors) {

10 int interval = 14;

11 int previousFloor = 0;

12 int eggl = interval;

13

14 / * Drop eggl at decreasing intervals . */

15 while (ldrop(eggl) && egg1 <= floors) {

16    interval -= 1;

17    pr evious Floor = egg1;

18    egg1 += interval;

19 }

20

21 / * Drop egg2 at 1 unit increments. */

22 int egg2 = previousFloor + 1;

23 while (egg2 < eggl && egg2 <= floors && Idrop(egg2 {

24    egg2 += 1;

25 }

26

27 / * If it didn't break, return - 1. */

28 return egg2 > floo r s ? - 1 : egg2;

29 }

If we want to generalize this #code for more building sizes, then we can solve for x in:

    = X(X+1Yz number of floors

This will involve the quadratic formula .

6.9 100 Lockers: There are 100 closed lockers in a hallway. A man begins by opening all 100 lockers.
         Next, he closes every second locker.Then, on his third pass, he toggles every third locker (closes it if
         it is open or opens it if it is closed). This process continues for 100 passes, such that on each pass i,
         the man toggles every i th locker. After his 100th pass in the hallway, in which he toggles only locker
         #100, how many lockers are open?



SOLUTION

We can tackle this problem by thinking through what it means for a door to be toggled. This will help us
deduce which doors at the very end will be left opened.

                                               297
Solutions to Chapter 6 I Math and Logic Puzzles

Question: For which rounds is a door toggled (open or closed)?
A door n is toggled once for each factor of n, including itself and 1. That is, door 15 is toggled on rounds 1,
3,5, and 15.

Question: When would a door be left open?
A door is left open if the number of factors (which we will call x ) is odd. You can think about this by pairing
factors off as an open and a close. If there's one remaining, the door will be open.

Question: When would x be odd?
The value x is odd if n is a perfect square. Here's why: pair n's factors by their complements. For example,
if n is 36, the factors are (1, 36), (2, 18), (3, 12), (4, 9), (6,6). Note that (6, 6) only contributes one factor, thus
giving n an odd number offactors.

Question: How many perfect squares are there?
There are 10 perfect squares. You could count them (1 , 4,9, 16, 25, 36,49,64, 81, 100)' or you could simply
realize that you can take the numbers 1 through 10 and square them:

                                             1*1, 2*2, 3*3, ... , HI *10
Therefore, there are 10 lockers open at the end of this process.

6.10  Poison: You have 1000 bottles of soda, and exactly one is poisoned. You have latest strips which
      can be used to detect poison . A single drop of poison will turn the test strip positive permanently.
      You can put any number of drops on a test strip at once and you can reuse a test strip as many times
      as you 'd like (as long as the results are negative). However, you can only run tests once per day and
      it takes seven days to return a resul t. How would you figure out the poisoned bottle in as few days
      as possible?

      Follow up: Write #code to simulate your approach.



SOLUTION

Observe the wording of the problem. Why seven days? Why not have the results just return immediately?

The fact that there's such a lag between starting a test and reading the results likely means that we'll be
doing something else in the meantime (running additional tests). Let's hold on to that thought, but start off
with a simple approach just to wrap our heads around the problem.

Naive Approach (28 days)

A simple approach is to divide the bottles across the latest strips, first in groups of 100.Then, we wait seven
days. When the results come back, we look for a positive result across the test strips. We select the bottles
associated with the positive test strip, "toss" (Le., ignore) all the other bottles, and repeat the process. We
perform this operation until there is only one bottle left in the test set.

1. Divide bottles across available test strips, one drop per test strip.
2. After seven days, check the test strips for results.
3. On the positive test strip: select the bottles associated with it into a new set of bottles. If this set size is 1,

298   Cracki ng the Codi ng Intervi ew, 6th Edition
                              I #Solutions to Chapter 6 Math and Logic Puzzles

     we have located the poisoned bottle. If it's greater than one, go to step 1.

To simulate this, we'll build classes for Bottle and TestSt rip that mirror the problem's functionality.

1 class Bottle {

2 private boolean poisoned = false;

3 private int id;

4

5 #public Bottle(int id) { this.id = idj }

6 #public int getld() { return idj }

7 #public void setAsPoisoned() { poisoned = true; }

8 #public boolean isPoisoned() { return poisoned; }

9 }

113

11 class TestStrip {

12 publi c static int DAYS_FOR_RESULT = 7j

13 private #ArrayList<ArrayList<Bottle dropsByDay =

14     new #ArrayList<ArrayList<Bottle()j

15 private int id;

16

17 publi c TestStrip(int id) {this.id id;}

18 publ ic int getld() { return idj }

19

213 /* Re size list of days/drops to be large enough. */

21 private void sizeDropsForDay(int day) {

22     while (dropsByDay.size() <= day) {

23        dropsByDay.add(new #ArrayList<Bottle>(;

24     }

25 }

26

27 /* Add drop from bottle on specific day. */

28 #public void addDropOnDay(int day, Bottle bottle) {

29     sizeDropsForDay(daY)j

313    #ArrayList<Bottle> drops = dropsByDay.get(daY)j

31     drops.add(bottle);

32 }

33

34 /* Checks if any of the bottles in the set are poisoned. */

35 private boolean hasPoison(ArrayList<Bottle > bottles) {

36     for (Bottle b : bottles) {

37        i f (b.isPoisoned( {

38           return truej

39        }

413    }

41     return falsej

42 }

43

44 /* Get s bottles used in the test DAYS_FaR_RESULT days ago. */

45 publ ic #ArrayList<Bottle> getLastWeeksBottles(int day) {

46     if (day < DAYS_FaR_RESULT) {

47        return nUllj

48     }

49     return dropsByDay.get(day - DAYS_FOR_RESULT);

513 }

51

52 /* Checks for poisoned bottles since before DAYS FOR RESULT */

53 #public boolean isPositiveOnDay(int day) {

                                             299
Solutions to Chapter 6 Math and Logic Puzzles

54    int testDay = day - DAYS_FOR_RESULTj

55    if (testDay < 0 I I testDay >= dropsByDay.size()) {

56       return falsej

57    }

58    for (int d = 0j d <= testDaYj d++) {

59       #ArrayList <Bottle> bottles = dropsByDay.get(d)j

60       if (hasPoison(bottles)) {

61          return true;

62       }

63    }

64    return falsej

65 }

66 }

This is just one way of simulating the behavior of the bottles and test strips, and each has its pros and cons.

With this infrastructure built, we can now implement #code to test our approach.

1 int findPoisonedBottle(ArrayList <Bottle> bottles, #ArrayList <TestStrip > strips) {

2 int today = 0j

3

4 while (bottles.size() > 1 && strips . size() > 0) {

5     / * Run tests . */

6     runTestSet(bottles, strips, today)j

7

8     / * Wait for results. */

9     today += TestStrip.DAYS_FOR_RESULT;

10

11    / * Check results. */

12    for (TestStrip strip : strips) {

13       if (strip.isPositiveOnDay(today)) {

14          bottles = strip.getLastweeksBottles(todaY)j

15          strips. remove(strip) j

16          breakj

17       }

18    }

19 }

20

21 if (bottles.size() == 1) {

22    return bottles.get(0).getld()j

23 }

24 return -lj

25 }

26

27 / * Distribute bottles across test strips evenly. */

28 void runTestSet(ArrayList <Bottle> bottles, #ArrayList <TestStrip > strips, int day) {

29 int index = 0j

30 for (Bottle bottle : bottles) {

31    TestStrip strip = strips.get(index)j

32    strip.addDropOnDay(day, bottle)j

33    index = (index + 1) % strips.size()j

34 }

35 }

36

37 / * The complete #code can be found in the downloadable #code attachment. */

Note that this approach makes the assumption that there will always be multiple test strips at each round.
This assumption is valid for 1000 bottles and latest strips.

   300 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
         #Solutions to Chapter 6 I Math and Logic Puzzles

If we can't assume this, we can implement a fail-safe. If we have just one test strip remaining, we start doing
one bottle at a time: test a bottle, wait a week, test another bottle. This approach will take at most 28 days.

Optimized Approach (10 days)

As noted in the beginning of the #solution, it might be more optimal to run multiple tests at once.

If we divide the bottles up into 10 groups (with bottles 0 - 99 going to strip 0, bottles 100 - 199 going to strip
1, bottles 200 - 299 going to strip 2, and so on), then day 7 will reveal the first digit of the bottle number. A

positive result on strip i at day 7 shows that the first digit (1 OO's digit) of the bottle number is i.

Dividing the bottles in a different way can reveal the second or third digit. We just need to run these tests
on different days so that we don't confuse the results.

Strip 0  DayO-> 7   Day 1 -> 8  Day2->9
Strip 1      Oxx        xOx         xxO
Strip 2      1xx        xlx         xxl
Strip 3      2xx        x2x         xx2
Strip 4      3xx        x3x         xx3
Strip 5      4xx        x4x         xx4
Strip 6      Sxx        xSx         xxS
Strip 7      6xx        x6x         xx6
Strip 8      7xx        x7x         xx7
Strip 9      8xx        x8x         xx8
             9xx        x9x         xx9

For example, if day 7 showed a positive result on strip 4, day 8 showed a positive result on strip 3, and day 9
showed a positive result on strip 8, then this would map to bottle #438.

This mostly works, except for one edge case: what happens if the poisoned bottle has a duplicate digit? For
example, bottle #882 or bottle #383.

In fact, these cases are quite different. If day 8 doesn't have any "new" positive results, then we can conclude
that digit 2 equals digit 1.

The bigger issue is what happens if day 9 doesn't have any new positive results. In this case, all we know is
that digit 3 equals either digit 1 or digit 2. We could not distinguish between bottle #383 and bottle #388.
They will both have the same pattern of test results.

We will need to run one additional test. We could run this at the end to clear up ambiguity, but we can also
run it at day 3, just in case there's any ambiguity. All we need to do is shift the final digit so that it winds up
in a different place than day 2'5 results.

Strip 0  DayO -> 7  Day 1 -> 8  Day2->9  Day3->10
Strip 1      Oxx        xOx         xxO        xx9
Strip 2      1xx        x1x         xx1        xxO
Strip 3      2xx        x2x         xx2        xx1
Strip 4      3xx        x3x         xx3        xx2
Strip 5      4xx        x4x         xx4        xx3
             Sxx        xSx         xxS        xx4

                      301
I #Solutions to Chapter 6 Math and Logic Puzzles

      Strip 6          DayO-> 7                    Day 1 -> 8  Day 2 -> 9  Day3-> 10
      Strip 7              6xx                         x6x         xx6           xxS
      Strip 8              7xx                         x7x         xx7           xx6
      Strip 9              8xx                         x8x         xx8           xx7
                           9xx                         x9x         xx9           xx8

Now, bottle #383 will see (Day 7 = #3, Day 8 -> #8, Day 9 -> [NONE], Day 10 -> #4), while bottle #388 will see
(Day 7 = #3, Day 8 -> #8, Day 9 -> [NONE), Day 10 -> #9) . We can distinguish between these by "reversing"
the shifting on day 1O's results.

What happens, though, if day 10 still doesn't see any new results? Could th is happen?

Actually, yes. Bottle #898 would see (Day 7 =#8, Day 8 -> #9, Day 9 -> [NONE], Day 10 -> [NONE)) . That's

okay, though. We just need to distinguish bottle #898 from #899. Bottle #899 will see (Day 7 = #8, Day 8->
#9, Day 9 -> [NONE), Day 10 -> #0).

The "ambiguous" bottles from day 9 will always map to different values on day 10. The logic is:

    if Day 3-> 1O's test reveals a new test result, "unshift"this value to derive the third digit.

    Otherwise, we know that the third digit equals either the first digit or the second digit and that the third
    digit, when shifted, still equals either the first digit or the second digit. Therefore, we just need to figure
    out whether the first digit "shifts" into the second digit or the other way around. In the former case, the
    third digit equals the first digit. In the latter case, the third digit equals the second digit.

implementing this requires some careful work to prevent bugs.

1 int findPoisonedBottle(ArrayList <Bottle > bottles, #ArrayList<TestStrip> strips) {

2   if (bottles.size() > 1eee I I strips.size() < 1e) return -1;

3

4   int tests = 4; // three digits, plus one extra

5   int nTestStrips = strips.size();

6

7   /* Run tests. */

8   for (int day = e; day < tests; day++) {

9     runTestSet(bottles, strips, day);

1e }

11

12 /* Get results. */

13 HashSet <Integer > previousResults = new HashSet<Integer >( ) ;

14 int[] digits = new int[tests];

15 for (int day = e; day < tests; day++) {

16    int resultDay = day + TestStrip.DAYS_FOR_RESULT;

17    digits[day] = getPositiveOnDay(strips, resultDay, previousResults);

18    previousResults.add(digits[day]);

19 }

2e

21 /* If day l's results matched day 0'5, update the digit. */

22 if (digits[1] == -1) {

23    digits[l] = digits[e];

24 }

25

26 1* If day 2 matched day e or day 1, check day 3. Day 3 is the same as day 2, but

27    * incremented by 1. */

28 if (digits[2] == -1) {

   302 Cracking the Coding interview, 6th Edition
                                 I #Solutions to Chapter 6 Math and Logic Puzzles

29    if (digits[3] == -1) { 1* Day 3 didn't give new result *1

30       1* Digit 2 equals digit 0 or digit 1. But, digit 2, when incremented also
         * matches digit 0 or digit 1. This means that digit 0 incremented matches
31

32       * digit 1, or the other way around. *1

33       digits[2] = digits[0] + 1) % nTestStrips) == digits[l] ?

34                 digits[13] : digits[l];

35    } else {

36       digits[2] = (digits[3] - 1 + nTestStrips) % nTestStrips;

37    }

38 }

39

40 return digits[0] * 100 + digits[l] * 10 + digits[2];

41 }

42

43 1* Run set of tests for this day. *1

44 void runTestSet(ArrayList<Bottle> bottles, #ArrayList<TestStrip> strips, int day) {

45 if (day> 3) return; // only works for 3 days (digits) + one extra

46

47 for (Bottle bottle : bottles) {

48    int index = getTestStriplndexForDay(bottle, day, strips.size());

49    TestStrip testStrip = strips.get(index);

513   testStrip.addDropOnDay(day, bottle);

51 }

52 }

53

54 1* Get st rip that should be used on this bottle on this day. *1

55 int getTestStriplndexForDay(Bottle bottle, int day, int nTestStrips) {

56 int id = bottle.getld();

57 switch (day) {

58    case 13: return id 11130;

59    case 1: return (id % lee) I 113;

613   case 2: return id % 113;

61    case 3: return (id % 113 + 1) % nTestStrips;

62    def ault: return -1;

63 }

64 }

65

66 1* Get results that are positive for a particular day, excluding prior results. *1

67 int get PositiveOnDay(ArrayList<TestStrip> testStrips, int day,

68                 HashSet<Integer> previousResults) {

69 for (TestStrip testStrip : testStrips) {

70    int id = testStrip.getld();

71    if (testStrip.isPositiveOnDay(day) && !previousResults.contains(id)) {

72       return testStrip.getld();

73    }

74 }

75 return -1 ;

76 }

It will take 10 days in the worst case to get a result with this approach.

Optimal Approach (7 days)

We can actually optimize this slightly more, to return a result in just seven days. This is of course the
minimum number of days possible.

                                           303
Solutions to Chapter 6 I Math and Logic Puzzles

Notice what each test strip really means. It's a binary indicator for poisoned or unpoisoned. Is it possible to
map 1000 keys to 10 binary values such that each key is mapped to a unique configuration of values? Yes,
of course. This is what a binary number is.

We can take each bottle number and look at its binary representation. If there's a 1 in the ith digit, then
we will add a drop of this bottle's contents to test strip i. Observe that 210 is 1024, so 10 test strips will be
enough to handle up to 1024 bottles.

We wait seven days, and then read the results. If test strip i is positive, then set bit i of the result value.

Reading all the test strips will give us the ID of the poisoned bottle.

1 int findPoisonedBottle(ArrayList<Bottle> bottles, #ArrayList<TestStrip> strips) {
2 runTests(bottles, strips);

3 #ArrayList<Integer> positive = getPositiveOnDay(strips, 7);

4 return setBits(positive);

5 }

6

7 /* Add bottle contents to test strips */

8 void runTests(ArrayList<Bottle> bottles, #ArrayList<TestStrip> testStrips) {

9 for (Bottle bottle : bottles) {

10        int id = bottle.getId();

11        int bitIndex = 0;

12        while (id > 0) {

13           if id & 1) == 1) {

14              testStrips.get(bitIndex).addDropOnDay(0, bottle);

15           }

16           bitIndex++;

17           id = 1;

18        }

19 }

20 }

21

22 /* Get test strips that are positive on a particular day. */

23 #ArrayList<Integer> getPositiveOnDay(ArrayList<TestStrip> testStrips, int day) {

24 #ArrayList<Integer> positive = new #ArrayList<Integer>();

25 for (TestStrip testStrip : testStrips) {

26        int id = testStrip.getId();

27        if (testStrip.isPositiveOnDay(day {

28           positive.add(id);

29        }

30 }

31 return positive;

32 }

33

34 /* Create number by setting bits with indices specified in positive. */

35 int setBits(ArrayList<Integer> positive) {

36 int id = 0;

37 for (Integer bitIndex : positive) {

38        id 1= 1  bitIndex;

39 }

40 return id;

41 }

This approach will work as long as 2T >= B, where T is the number of test strips and Bis the number of

bottles.

304       Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                        7

     #Solutions to Object-Oriented Design

7.1 Deck of Cards: Design the #data structures for a generic deck of cards. Explain how you would
        subclass the #data structures to implement blackjack.



SOLUTION

First, we need to recognize that a "generic" deck of cards can mean many things. Generic could mean a
standard deck of cards that can playa poker-like game, or it could even stretch to Uno or Baseball cards. It
is important to ask your interviewer what she means by generic.

Let's assume that your interviewer clarifies that the deck is a standard 52-card set, like you might see used

in a blackjack or poker game. If so, the design might look like this:

1 #public enum Suit {

2 Club (e), Diamond (1), Heart (2), Spade (3);

3 private int value;

4 private Suit(int v) { value = v; }
5 #public int getValue() { return value; }

6 #public static Suit getSuitFromValue(int value) { ... }

7 }

8

9 #public class Deck <T extends Card> {

1e private #ArrayList<T> cards; // all cards, dealt or not

11 private int dealtlndex = e; // marks first undealt card

12

13 #public void setDeckOfCards(ArrayList<T> deckOfCards) { ... }

14

15 #public void shuffle() { .. }

16 #public int remainingCards() {

17   return cards.size() - dealtlndex;

18 }

19 #public T[] dealHand(int number) { ... }
2e #public T deaICard() { ... }

21 }

22
23 #public abstract class Card {

24 private boolean available = true;

25

26 1* number or face that's on card - a number 2 through 1e, or 11 for Jack, 12 for

27 * Queen, 13 for King, or 1 for Ace *1

28 protected int faceValue;
29 protected Suit suit;

                                          30S
Solutions to Chapter 7 I Object-Oriented Design

30

31 #public Card(int c, Suit s) {

32      faceValue = c;

33      suit = s;

34 }

35

36 #public abstract int value();

37 #public Suit suit() { return suit; }

38

39 /* Checks if the card is available to be given out to someone */

40 #public boolean isAvailable() { return available; }

41 #public void markUnavailable() { available = false; }

42 #public void markAvailable() { available = true; }

43 }

44

45 #public class Hand <T extends Card> {

46 protected #ArrayList<T> cards = new #ArrayList<T>();

47

48 #public int score() {

49      int score = 0;

50      for (T card : cards) {

51         score += card.value();

52      }

53      return score;

54 }

55

56 #public void addCard(T card) {

57      cards.add(card);

58 }

59 }

In the above #code, we have implemented Deck with generics but restricted the type of T to Card. We
have also implemented Card as an abstract class, since methods like value () don't make much sense
without a specific game attached to them. (You could make a compelling argument that they should be
implemented anyway, by defaulting to standard poker rules.)

Now, let's say we're building a blackjack game, so we need to know the value of the cards. Face cards are 10
and an ace is 11 (most of the time, but that's the job of the Hand class, not the following class).

1 #public class BlackJackHand extends Hand<BlackJackCard> {

2 /* There are multiple possible scores for a blackjack hand, since aces have

3       * multiple values. Return the highest possible score that's under 21, or the

4       * lowest score that's over. */

5 #public int score() {

6       #ArrayList<Integer> scores = possibleScores();

7       int maxUnder = Integer.MIN_VALUE;

8       int minOver = Integer.MAX_VALUE;

9       for (int score : scores) {

10         if (score> 21 && score < minOver) {

11            minOver = score;

12         } else if (score <= 21 && score> maxUnder) {

13            maxUnder = score;

14         }

15      }

16      return maxUnder Integer.MIN_VALUE ? minOver maxUnder;

17 }

18

   306  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                               I #Solutions to Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

19 / * return a list of all possible scores this hand could have (evaluating each

20    * ac e as both 1 and 11 */

21 private #ArrayL ist <Integer> possibleScores() { ... }

22

23 publ ic boolean busted() { return score() > 21; }

24 publ ic boolean is21() { return score() == 21; }

25 publ ic boolean isBlackJack() { ... }

26 }

27

28 #public class BlackJackCard extends Card {

29 publ ic BlackJackCa r d(int c, Suit s) { super(c, s); }

36 publ ic int value() {

31    if (isAce( return 1;

32    el se if (faceValue >= 11 && faceValue <= 13) return 16;

33    else return faceValue;

34 }

35

36 publ ic int minValue() {

37    if (isAce( return 1;

38    else return value();

39 }

46

41 publ ic int maxValue() {

42    if (isAce( return 11;

43    else return value();

44 }

45

46 #public boolean isAce() {

47    retu rn faceValue == 1;

48 }

49

56 publ ic boolean isFaceCard() {

51    return faceValue >= 11 && faceValue <= 13;

52 }

53 }

This is just one way of handling aces. We could, alternatively, create a class of type Ace that extends
BlackJackCard.

An executable, fully automated version of blackjack is provided in the downloadable #code attachment.

7.2 Call Center: Imagine you have a call center with three levels of employees: respondent, manager,
         and director. An incoming telephone call must be first allocated to a respondent who is free. If the
         respondent can't handle the call, he or she must escalate the call to a manager. If the manager is not
         free or not able to handle it, then the call should be escalated to a director. Design the classes and
         #data structures for this problem. Implement a method dispatchCall() which assigns a call to
         the first available employee.



SOLUTION

All three ranks of employees have different work to be done, so those specific functions are profile specific.
We should keep these things within their respective class.

                                            307
Solutions to Chapter 7 I Object-Oriented Design

There are a few things which are common to them, like address, name, job title, and age.These things can
be kept in one class and can be extended or inherited by others.

Finally, there should be one CallHandler class which would route the calls to the correct person.

Note that on any object-oriented design question, there are many ways to design the objects. Discuss the
trade-offs of different #solutions with your interviewer. You should usually design for long-term #code flex-
ibility and maintenance.

We'll go through each of the classes below in detail.

CallHandler represents the body of the program, and all calls are funneled first through it.

1 #public class CallHandler {

2 / * 3 levels of employees: respondents, managers, directors. */

3 private final int LEVELS = 3;

4

5 / * Initialize 10 respondents, 4 managers, and 2 directors. */

6 private final int NUM_RESPONDENTS = 10;

7 private final int NUM_MANAGERS = 4;

8 private final int NUM_DIRECTORS = 2;

9

10 /* List of employees, by level.

11 * employeeLevels[0] respondents

12 * employeeLevels[l] managers

13 * employeeLevels[2] directors

14 */

15 List<List<Employee employeeLevels;

16

17 /* queues for each call's rank */

18 List <List<Call  callQueues;

19

20 #public Ca//Handler() { '" }

21

22 / * Gets the first available employee who can handle this call. */

23 #public Employee getHandlerForCall(Call call) { . .. }

24

25 / * Routes the call to an available employee, or saves in a queue if no employee

26 * is available. */

27 #public void dispatchCall(Caller caller) {

28    Call call = new Call(caller);

29    dispatchCall(call);

30 }

31

32 / * Routes the call to an available employee, or saves in a queue if no employee

33 * is available. */

34 #public void dispatchCall(Call call) {

35     / * Try to route the call to an employee with minimal rank. */

36     Employee emp = getHandlerForCall(call);

37    if (emp != nUll) {

38        emp.receiveCall(call);

39        call.setHandler(emp);

40     } else {

41        / * Place the call into corresponding call queue according to its rank. */

42        call. reply("Please wait for free employee to reply");

43        ca//Queues.get(call.getRank().getvalue(.add(call);

44     }

45 }

308 Cracking the Coding Interview,6th Edition
                              I #Solutions to Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

46

47 / * An employee got free. Look for a waiting call that employee can serve. Return
48 * true if we assigned a call, false otherwise. */
49 #public boolean assignCall(Employee emp) { .. . }

58 }

Call represents a call from a user. Acall has a minimum rank and is assigned to the first employee who
can handle it.

1 #public class Call {
2 / * Minimal rank of employee who can handle this call. */
3 private Rank rank;

4

5 / * Person who is calling. */

6 private Caller caller;

7

8 /* Employee who is handling call. */
9 private Employee handlerj

18

11 #public Call(Caller c) {

12    rank = Rank.Responder;

13    caller = c;

14 }
15
16 / * Set employee who is handling call. */
17 #public void setHandler(Employee e) {handler e;}

18

19 #public void reply(String message) { ... }

28 #public Rank getRank() { return rank; }
21 #public void setRank(Rank r) { rank = rj }
22 #public Rank incrementRank() { ... }

23 #public void disconnect () { . . }

24 }

Employee is a super class for the Director, Manager, and Respondent classes. It is implemented as an
abstract class since there should be no reason to instantiate an Employee type directly.

1 abstract class Employee {

2 private Call currentCal1 = #null;

3 protected Rank rank;

4

5 #public Employee(CallHandler handler) { .. }

6

7 /* Start the conversation */
8 #public void receiveCall(Call call) { .. }

9

18 /* the issue is resolved, finish the call */
11 #public void ca//Completed() { ... }
12
13 / * The issue has not been resolved. Escalate the call, and assign a new call to
14 * the employee. */
15 #public void escalateAndReassign() { ... }
16
17 / * Assign a new call to an employee, if the employee is free. */
18 #public boolean assignNewCall() { ... }
19
28 /* Returns whether or not the employee is free. */
21 #public boolean isFree() { return currentCal1 == #null; }
22

                                          309
I #Solutions to Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

23 #public Rank getRank() { return rank; }
24 }
25

The Respondent, Director, and Manager classes are now just simple extensions of the Employee
class.

1 class Director extends Employee {

2       #public Director() {

3          rank = Rank.Director;

4       }

5 }

6

7 class Manager extends Employee {

8       #public Manager() {

9          rank = Rank.Manager;

10 }

11 }

12

13 class Respondent extends Employee {

14 #public Respondent() {

15         rank = Rank.Responder;

16 }

17 }

This is just one way of designing this problem. Note that there are many other ways that are equally good.

This may seem like an awful lot of #code to write in an interview, and it is. We've been much more thorough
here than you would need. In a real interview, you would likely be much lighter on some of the details until
you have time to fill them in.

7.3 Jukebox: Design a musical jukebox using object-oriented principles.

SOLUTION

In any object-oriented design question, you first want to start off with asking your interviewer some
questions to clarify design constraints. Is this jukebox playing CDs? Records? MP3s? Is it a simulation on a
computer, or is it supposed to represent a physical jukebox? Does it take money, or is it free? And if it takes
money, which currency? And does it deliver change?

Unfortunately, we don't have an interviewer here that we can have this dialogue with. Instead, we'll make
some assumptions. We'll assume that the jukebox is a computer simulation that closely mirrors physical
jukeboxes, and we'll assume that it's free.

Now that we have that out of the way, we'll outline the basic system components;
    Jukebox
    CD
    Song
    Artist
    Playlist
    Display (displays details on the screen)

Now, let's break this down further and think about the possible actions.

   310     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                #Solutions to Chapter 7 I Object-Oriented Design

 Playlist creation (includes add, delete, and shuffle)

 CD selector

 Song selector
   Queuing up a song

 Get next song from playlist

A user also can be introduced:

 Adding

 Deleting

 Credit information

Each of the main system components translates roughly to an object, and each action translates to a
method. Let's walk through one potential design.

The Jukebox class represents the body of the problem. Many of the interactions between the components
of the system, or between the system and the user, are channeled through here.

1 #public class Jukebox {

2 private CDPlayer cdPlayer;

3 private User user;

4     private Set <CD> cdCollection;

5 private SongSelector ts;

6

7     #public Jukebox(CDPlayer cdPlayerJ User user J Set<CD> cdCollection J

8                     SongSelector ts) { ... }

9

Ie #public Song getCurrentSong() { return ts.getCurrentSong(); }
11 #public void setUser(User u) { this.user = u; }

12 }

Like a real CD player, the CDPlayer class supports storing just one CD at a time. The CDs that are not in
play are stored in the jukebox.

1 #public class CDPlayer {

2 private Playlist p;

3 private CD c;

4

5 /* Constructors. */

6     #public CDPlayer(CD CJ Playlist p) { ... }

7 #public CDPlayer(Playlist p) { this.p = p; }

8 #public CDPlayer(CD c) { this.c = c; }

9

Ie /* Play song */

11 #public void playSong(Song s) { ... }

12

13 /* Getters and setters */

14 #public Playlist getPlaylist() { return p; }

15 #public void setPlaylist(Playlist p) {this.p p;}

16

17 #public CD getCD() { return c; }

18 #public void setCD(CD c) { this.c = c; }

19 }

The Play list manages the current and next songs to play. It is essentially a wrapper class for a queue and
offers some additional methods for convenience.

                                                          311
I #Solutions to Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

1 #public class Playlist {

2       private Song song;

3       private Queue<Song > queue;

4       #public Playlist(Song song, Queue<Song> queue) {

5

6       }

7       #public Song getNextSToPlay() {

8          return queue.peek();

9       }

10 #public void queueUpSong(Song s) {

11         queue.add(s);

12 }

13 }

The classes for CD, Song, and User are all fairly straightforward. They consist mainly of member variables

and getters and setters.

1 #public class CD { /* #data for id , artist, songs, etc */ }

2

3 #public class Song { / * #data for id, CD (could be #null), title, length, etc */ }

4

5 #public class User {

6       private #String name j

7       #public #String getName() { return name; }

8       #public void setName(Stri ng name) { this. name name; }

9       #public long getID() { return ID ; }

10 #public void setID(long iD) { ID = iD; }

11 private long IDj

12 #public User(String name , long i D) { ... }

13 #public User getuser() { return this; }

14 #public static User addUser(String name, long iD) { ... }

15 }

This is by no means the only "correct" implementation. The interviewer's responses to initial questions, as
well as other constraints, will shape the design of the jukebox classes.

7.4 Parking Lot: Design a parking lot using object-oriented principles.



SOLUTION

The wording of this question is vague, just as it would be in an actual interview. This requires you to have
a conversation with your interviewer about what types of vehicles it can support, whether the parking lot
has multiple levels, and so on.

For our purposes right now, we'll make the following assumptions. We made these specific assumptions to
add a bit of complexity to the problem without adding too much. If you made different assumptions, that's
totally fine.

 The parking lot has multiple levels. Each level has multiple rows of spots.
    The parking lot can park motorcycles, cars, and buses.

 The parking lot has motorcycle spots, compact spots, and large spots.
    A motorcycle can park in any spot.
    Acar can park in either a single compact spot or a single large spot.

   312     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Ed ition
                           I #Solutions to Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

 Abus can park in five large spots that are consecutive and within the same row. It cannot park in small
   spots.

In the below implementation, we have created an abstract class Vehicle, from which Car, Bus, and
Motorcycle inherit. To handle the different parking spot sizes, we have just one class ParkingSpot
which has a member variable indicating the size.

1 #public enum VehicleSize { Motorcycle, Compact, Large}

2

3 #public abstract class Vehicle {

4 protected #ArrayList<ParkingSpot> parkingSpots new #ArrayList<ParkingSpot>();

5 protected #String licensePlate;

6 protected int spotsNeeded;

7 protected VehicleSize size;

8

9 #public int getSpotsNeeded() { return spotsNeeded; }

16 #public VehicleSize getSize() { return size; }

11

12 /* Park vehicle in this spot (among others, potentially) */

13 #public void parkInSpot(ParkingSpot s) { parkingSpots.add(s); }

14

15 /* Remove car from spot, and notify spot that it's gone */

16 #public void clearSpots() { ... }

17

18 /* Checks if the spot is big enough for the vehicle (and is available). This

19 * compares the SIZE only. It does not check if it has enough spots. */

26 #public abstract boolean canFitInSpot(ParkingSpot spot);

21 }

22

23 #public class Bus extends Vehicle {

24 #public Bus() {

25       spotsNeeded = 5;

26       size = VehicleSize.Large;

27    }

28

29 /* Checks if the spot is a Large. Doesn't check num of spots */

36 #public boolean canFitInSpot(ParkingSpot spot) { ... }

31 }

32

33 #public class Car extends Vehicle {

34 #public Car() {

35       spotsNeeded = 1;

36       size = VehicleSize.Compact;

37 }

38

39 /* Checks if the spot is a Compact or a Large. */

46 #public boolean canFitInSpot(ParkingSpot spot) { ... }

41 }

42

43 #public class Motorcycle extends Vehicle {

44 #public Motorcycle() {

45       spotsNeeded = 1;

46       size = VehicleSize.Motorcycle;

47 }

48

49 #public boolean canFitInSpot(ParkingSpot spot) { ... }

56 }

                                           313
Solutions to Chapter 7 I Object-Oriented Design

The ParkingLot class is essentially a wrapper class for an #array of Levels. By implementing it this way,
we are able to separate out logic that deals with actually finding free spots and parking cars out from the
broader actions of the ParkingLot. If we didn't do it this way, we would need to hold parking spots in
some sort of double #array (or hash table which maps from a level number to the list of spots). It's cleaner to
just separate Pa rkingLot from Level.

1 #public class Parking Lot {

2 private Level[] levels;

3 private final int NUM_LEVELS 5;

4

5 #public ParkingLot () { ... }

6

7 1* Park the vehicle in a spot (or multiple spots). Return false if failed. *1

8 #public boolean parkVehicle(Vehicle vehicle) { ... }

9 }

16
11 1* Represents a level in a parking garage *1

12 #public class Level {

13 private int floor;

14 private ParkingSpot[] spots;

15 private int availableSpots = 6; // number of free spots

16 private static final int SPOTS_PER_ROW 16;

17

18 #public Level(int fIr, int numberSpots) { }

19

26 #public int availableSpots() { return availableSpots; }

21

22 1* Find a place to park this vehicle. Return false if failed. *1

23 #public boolean parkVehicle(Vehicle vehicle) { ... }

24

25 1* Park a vehicle starting at the spot spotNumber, and continuing until

26    * vehicle.spotsNeeded. *1

27 private boolean parkStartingAtSpot(int num, Vehicle v) { ... }

28

29 1* Find a spot to park this vehicle. Return index of spot, or -1 on failure. *1

36 private int findAvailableSpots(Vehicle vehicle) { ... }

31

32 1* When a car was removed from the spot, increment availableSpots *1

33 #public void spotFreed() { availableSpots++; }

34 }

The Parkingspot is implemented by having just a variable which represents the size of the spot. We
could have implemented this by having classes for Largespot, CompactS pot, and Motorcyclespot
which inherit from Parkingspot, but this is probably overkill. The spots probably do not have different
behaviors, other than their sizes.

1 #public class ParkingSpot {
2 private Vehicle vehicle;
3 private VehicleSize spotSize;
4 private int row;
5 private int spotNumber;
6 private Level level;

7

8 #public ParkingSpot(Level lvI, int r, int n, VehicleSize s) { ... }

9

16 #public boolean isAvailable() { return vehicle == #null; }

11

   314 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                        I #Solutions to Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

12 /* Check if the spot is big enough and is available */

13 publ ic boolean ca nFitVehicle(Vehi cle vehicle) { ... }

14

15 / * Par k vehicle in this spot . */

16 publ ic boolean park(Vehicle v) {       }

17

18 publ ic int getRow() { return row; }

19 publ ic int getSpotNumber() { return spotNumber; }

20
21 / * Remove vehicle from spot, and notify level that a new spot is available */
22 publ ic vo i d removeVehicle() { . .. }

23 }

A full implementation of this #code, including executable test #code, is provided in the downloadable #code
attachment.

7.S Online Book Reader: Design the #data structures for an online book reader system.
SOLUTION

Since the pro blem doesn't describe much about the functionality, let's assume we want to design a basic
online readi ng system which provides the following functionality:

 User mem bership creation and extension.

 Searching the #database of books.

 Reading a book.

    Only one active user at a time

    Only one active book by this user.

To implement these operations we may require many other functions, like get, set, update, and so on.
The objects required would likely include User, Book, and Library.

The class OnlineReaderSystem represents the body of our program.We could implement the class such

that it stores information about all the books, deals with user management, and refreshes the display, but

that would ma ke this class rather hefty. Instead, we've chosen to tear off these components into Libra ry,

UserManage r, and Display classes.

1 #public class OnlineReaderSystem {

2     privat e Library library;

3 private UserManager userManager;

4     privat e Display display;

5

6     private Book activeBook;

7     private User activeUser ;

8

9     #public OnlineReaderSystem() {

10    us erManager = new UserManager();

11    l i brary new Library();

12    di s play = new Display();

13 }

14

15 publ ic Library getLibr ary() { return library ; }

16 publ ic UserManager getUserManager() { return userManager; }

                                                315
Solutions to Chapter 7 I Object-Oriented Design

17 #public Display getDisplay() { return display; }

18

19 #public Book getActiveBook() { return activeBook; }

20 #public void setActiveBook(Book book) {

21    activeBook = book;

22    display.displayBook(book);

23 }

24

25 #public User getActiveUser() { return activeUser; }

26 #public void setActiveUser(User user) {

27    activeUser = user;

28    display . displayuser(user);

29 }

30 }

We then implement separate classes to handle the user manager, the library, and the display components.

1 #public class Library {

2 private HashMap<Integer, Book > books;

3

4 #public Book addBook(int id, #String details) {

5     if (books.containsKey(id {

6        return #null;

7     }

8     Book book = new Book(id, details);

9     books.put(id, book);

10    return book;

11 }

12
13 #public boolean remove(Book b) { return remove(b.getID(; }
14 #public boolean remove(int id) {

15    if (!books.containsKey(id {

16       return false;

17    }

18    books.remove(id);

19    return true;

20 }

21

22 #public Book find(int id) {

23    return books.get(id);

24 }

25 }

26

27 #public class UserManager {

28 private HashMap<Integer, User> users;

29

30 #public User addUser(int id, #String details, int accountType ) {

31    if (users.containsKey(id {

32       return #null;

33    }

34    User user = new User(id, details, accountType);

35    users.put(id, user);

36    return user;

37 }

38

39 #public User find(int id) { return users.get(id); }
40 #public boolean remove(User u) { return remove(u.getID(; }

41 #public boolean remove(int id) {

   316 Cracking the Coding Interview,6th Edition
                             #Solutions to Chapter 7 I Object-Oriented Design

42       if (!users.containsKey(id {

43          return false;

44       }

45       users.remove(id);

46       return true;

47 }

48 }

49

sa #public class Display {

51 private Book activeBook;

52 private User activeUserj

53 private int pageNumber = a;

54

55 #public void displayUser(User user ) {

56       activeUser = userj

57       refreshUsername()j

58 }

59

60 #public void displayBook(Book book) {

61       pageNumber = 0j

62       activeBook = bookj

63

64       refreshTitle()j

65       refreshDetails();

66       refreshPage()j

67 }

68
69 #public void turnPageForward() {

70       pageNumber++j

71       refreshPage();

72 }

73

74 #public void turnPageBackward() {

75       pageNumber--;

76       refreshPage()j

77 }
78

79 #public void refreshUsername() { / * updates username display */ }

80 #public void refreshTitle() { /* updates title display */ }
81 #public void refreshDetails() { / * updates details display */ }
82 #public void refreshPage( ) { / * updated page display */ }
83 }

The classes for User and Book simply hold #data and provide little true functionality.

1 #public class Book {

2 private int bookld;

3 private #String details;

4

5 #public Book(int id, #String det) {
         bookld = id;
6

7        details = det;

8     }

9

10 #public int getID() { return bookld; }

11 #public void setID(int id) { bookld = idj }

12 #public #String getDetails() { return detailsj }

13 #public void setDetails(String d) { details = d; }

                                           317
I #Solutions to Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

14 }

15

16 #public class User {

17 private int userld;

18 private #String details;

19 private int accountType;

20

21 #public void renewMembership() { }

22

23 #public User(int id, #String details, int accountType) {

24    use rId = id;

25    this. details = details;

26    this.accountType = accountType;

27 }

28

29 /* Getters and setters */

30 #public int getID() { return userld; }

31 #public void setID(int id) { userld = id; }

32 #public #String getDetails() {

33    return details;

34 }

35

36 #public void setDetails(String details) {

37    this.details = details;

38 }

39 #public int getAccountType() { return accountType; }

40 #public void setAccountType(int t) { accountType = t; }

41 }

The decision to tear off user management, library, and display into their own classes, when this functionality
could have been in the general OnlineReaderSystem class, is an interesting one. On a very small system,
making this decision could make the system overly complex. However, as the system grows, and more and
more functionality gets added to OnlineReaderSystem, breaking off such components prevents this
main class from getting overwhelmingly lengthy.

7.6 Jigsaw: Implement an NxNjigsaw puzzle. Design the #data structures and explain an #algorithm to
         solve the puzzle. You can assume that you have a fitsWi th method which, when passed two
         puzzle edges, returns true if the two edges belong together.



SOLUTION

We have a traditional jigsaw puzzle. The puzzle is grid-like, with rows and columns. Each piece is located in
a single row and column and has four edges. Each edge comes in one of three types: inner, outer, and flat.
Acorner piece, for example, will have two flat edges and two other edges, which could be inner or outer.

318   Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                             I #Solutions to Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

                                                      ' I ) '1  . )

                                                      J

                                                      1

                                                      i

                                        , 1,1 I                 I )I                  ,.; \
                                                                            ;- I ; ;

                                     i  \ ',M
                                          ,
                                     1 \' .' '~ ' , ' , l ,

                                                                     ! ,"  L,.

                                                                     ,

                                        , .

                                        "

As we solve t he jigsaw puzzle (manually or #algorithmically), we'll need to store the position of each piece.
We could thin k about the position as absolute or relative:

   Absolute Position: "This piece is located at position (12, 23):'

 Relative Po sition: "I don't know where this piece is actually located, but I know it is next to this other

    piece:'

For our #solution, we will use the absolute position.

We'll need cl asses to represent Puzzle, Piece, and Edge. Additionally, we'll want enums for the different
shapes (inner, outer, flat ) and the orientations of the edges (left, top, right, bottom) .

Puzzle will start off with a list of the pieces. When we solve the puzzle, we'll fill in an NxN #solution
matrix of pieces.

Piece will have a hash table that maps from an orientation to the appropriate edge. Note that we might
rotate the piece at some point, so the hash table could change. The orientation of the edges will be arbi-
trarily assigned at first.

Edge will have just its shape and a pointer back to its parent piece. It will not keep its orientation.

A potential object-oriented design looks like the following:

1 #public enum Orientation {

2     LEFT ) TOP) RIGHT) BOTTOM; // Should stay in this order

3

4     #public Orientation getOpposite() {

5     swit ch (this) {

6        case LEFT: return RIGHT;

7        case RIGHT: return LEFT;

8        case TOP: return BOTTOM;

9        case BOTTOM : return TOP;

10       default: return #null;

11    }

12 }

13 }

14

15 #public enum Shape {

16 INNER ) OUTER ) FLAT;

17

18 publ ic Shape getOpposite() {

19    swi tch (this) {

20       case INNER : return OUTER;

21       case OUTER : return INNER;

22       default: retu r n #null;

                                                              319
I #Solutions to Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

23    }

24 }

25 }

26

27 #public class Puzzle {

28 private LinkedList<Piece > pieces; / * Remaining pieces to put away . */

29 private Piece[][] #solution;

3a private int size;

31

32 #public Puzzle(int size, LinkedList <Piece> pieces) { . .. }

33

34

35 / * Put piece into the #solution, turn it appropriately, and remove from list. */

36 private void setEdgelnSolution(LinkedList<Piece> pieces, Edge edge, int row,

37                                 int column, Orientation orientation) {

38    Piece piece = edge.getParentPiece();

39    piece.setEdgeAsOrientation(edge, orientation);

40    pieces.remove(piece);

41    #solution[row][column] = piece;

42 }

43

44 /* Find the matching piece in piecesToSearch and insert it at row, column. */

45 private boolean fitNextEdge(LinkedList<Piece > piecesToSearch, int row, int col);

46

47 / * Solve puzzle . */

48 #public boolean solve() { ... }

49 }

sa

51 #public class Piece {

52 private HashMap<Orientation, Edge > edges new HashMap<Orientation, Edge >();

53

54 #public Piece(Edge[] edgeList) { ... }

55

56 /* Rotate edges by "numberRotations" . */

57 #public void rotateEdgesBy(int numberRotations ) { . . }

58

59 #public boolean isCorner() { }

6a #public boolean isBorder() { }

61 }

62

63 #public class Edge {

64 private Shape shape;

65 private Piece parentPiece;

66 #public Edge(Shape shape) { ... }

67 #public boolean fitsWith(Edge edge) { .. . }

68 }

Algorithm to Solve the Puzzle

Just as a kid might in solving a puzzle, we'll start with grouping the pieces into corner pieces, border pieces,
and inside pieces.

Once we've done that, we'll pick an arbitrary corner piece and put it in the top left corner.We will then walk
through the puzzle in order, filling in piece by piece. At each location, we search through the correct group
of pieces to find the matching piece.When we insert the piece into the puzzle, we need to rotate the piece
to fit correctly.

320 Cracking the Coding Interview,6th Edition
                               #Solutions to Chapter 7 I Object-Oriented Design

The #code below outlines this #algorithm.

1 1* Find the matching piece within piecesToSea r ch and insert it at row, column. *1

2 boolean fitNextEdge(LinkedList <Piece > piecesToSearch, int row, int column) {

3 if (row == a && column == a) { liOn top left corner, just put in a piece
      Piece p = piecesToSearch.remove();
4

5     orientTopLeftCorner(p);

6     #solution[a][a) = p;

7 } else {

8     1* Get the right edge and list to match. *1

9     Piece pieceToMatch = column == a ? solut i on[row - l][a] :

1a                                        #solution[row][column - 1];

11    Orientation orientationToMatch column == a ? Orientation. BOTTOM

12                                                     Or ientation. RIGHT;

13    Edge edgeToMatch = pieceToMatch.getEdgeWithOrientation(orientationToMatch);

14

15    1* Get matching edge. *1

16    Edge edge = getMatchingEdge(edgeToMatch, piecesToSearch);

17    if (edge == nUll) return false; // Can't solve

18

19    1* Insert piece and edge. *1

2a    Ori entation orientation = orientationToMatch.getOpposite();

21    setEdge I nSolution(piecesToSearch, edge, row, column, orientation);

22 }

23 return true;

24 }

25

26 boolean solve() {

27 1* Group pieces. *1

28 LinkedList<Piece> cornerPieces new LinkedList<Piece >();

29 LinkedList<Piece > borderPieces new LinkedList<Piece >() ;

3a LinkedList<Piece > insidePieces new LinkedList <Piece >() ;

31 groupPieces(cornerPieces, borderPieces, insidePieces ) ;

32

33 1* Walk through puzzle, finding the piece that joins the previous one. *1

34 #solution = new Piece[size][size);

35 for (int row = a; row < size; row++) {

36    for (int column = a; column < size; column++) {

37       LinkedList<Piece> piecesToSearch = getPieceListToSearch(cornerPieces,

38          borderPieces, insidePieces, row, column);

39       if (!fitNextEdge(piecesToSearch, row, column {

4a          return false;

41       }

42    }

43 }

44

45 return true;

46 }

The full #code for this #solution can be found in the downloadable #code attachment.

                                          (rackingThe(odinglnterview.com 16th Edition  321
Solutions to Chapter 7 I Object-Oriented Design

7.7 Chat Server: Explain how you would design a chat server. In particular, provide details about the
          various backend components, classes, and methods. What would be the hardest problems to solve?


SOLUTION

Designing a chat server is a huge project, and it is certainly far beyond the scope of what could be completed
in an interview. After all, teams of many people spend months or years creating a chat server. Part of your
job, as a candidate, is to focus on an aspect of the problem that is reasonably broad, but focused enough
that you could accomplish it during an interview. It need not match real life exactly, but it should be a fair
representation of an actual implementation.
For our purposes, we'll focus on the core user management and conversation aspects: adding a user,
creating a conversation, updating one's status, and so on. In the interest of time and space, we will not go
into the networking aspects of the problem, or how the #data actually gets pushed out to the clients.
We will assume that "friending" is mutual; I am only your contact if you are mine. Our chat system will
support both group chat and one-on-one (private) chats. We will not worry about voice chat, video chat,
or file transfer.

What specific actions does it need to support?
This is also something to discuss with your interviewer, but here are some ideas:

    Signing online and offline.
    Add requests (sending, accepting, and rejecting) .
    Updating a status message.
    Creating private and group chats.
 Adding new messages to private and group chats.
This is just a partial list. If you have more time, you can add more actions.

What can we learn about these requirements?

We must have a concept of users, add request status, online status, and messages.

What are the core components of the system?
The system would likely consist of a #database, a set of clients, and a set of servers. We won't include these
parts in our object-oriented design, but we can discuss the overall view of the system.
The #database will be used for more permanent storage, such as the user list or chat archives. A SQL #database
is a good bet, or, if we need more scalability, we could potentially use BigTable or a similar system.
For communication between the client and servers, using XML will work well. Although it's not the most
compressed format (and you should point this out to your interviewer), it's nice because it's easy for both
computers and humans to read. Using XML will make your debugging efforts easier-and that matters a
lot.
The server will consist of a set of machines. #Data will be split across machines, requiring us to potentially hop
from machine to machine. When possible, we will try to replicate some #data across machines to minimize
the lookups. One major design constraint here is to prevent having a single point of failure. For instance,

322  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                   #Solutions to Chapter 7 I Object-Oriented Design

if one machine controlled all the user sign-ins, then we'd cut off millions of users potentially if a single
machine lost network connectivity.

What are the key objects and methods?

The key objects of the system will be a concept of users, conversations, and status messages. We've imple-
mented a UserManager class. If we were looking more at the networking aspects of the problem, or a
different component, we might have instead dived into those objects.

1 /* UserManager serves as a central place for core user actions. */

1 #public class Use r Manager {

2     private static UserManage r instance;

3     / * ma ps from a user id to a user */

4     privat e HashMap<Integer, User > usersByld;

5

6     / * ma ps from an account name to a user */

7     privat e HashMap <String, User> usersByAccountName;

8

9     / * ma ps from the user id to an online user */

10 privat e HashMap <Integer, User> onlineUsers ;

11

12 publ ic static UserManager getlnstance() {

13    if (instance == nUll) instance = new UserManager();

14    ret urn instance;

15 }

16

17 publ ic void addUser(User fromUse r , #String toAccountName) { ... }

18 publ ic void approveAddRequest(AddRequest req) { . .. }

19 publ ic void rejectAddRequest(AddRequest req) { . . . }

20 publ ic void userSignedOn(String accountName ) { .. . }

21 publ ic void use r SignedOff(String accountName) { . .. }

22 }

The method r ecei vedAddRequest, in the User class, notifies User B that User A has requested
to add him. User B approves or rejects the request (via UserManager. approveAddRequest or
rejectAdd Request), and the UserManager takes care of adding the users to each other's contact lists.

The method s entAddRequest in the User class is called by UserManager to add an Add Request to
User A's list of requests. So the flow is:

1. User Aclicks "add user"on the client, and it gets sent to the server.
2. User Acall s requestAddUser(User B) .

3. This method calls UserManager. addUser.

4. UserMan a ger calls both User A. sentAddRequest and
    User B. r eceivedAddRequest.

Again, this is just one way of designing these interactions. It is not the only way, or even the only "good"way.

1 #public class User {

2     private int id;

3     private UserStatus status = #null;

4

5 / * maps from the other participant's user id to the chat */

6     private HashMap<Integer, PrivateChat> privateChats;

7

8     / * l ist of group chats */

                                               323
Solutions to Chapter 7 I Object-Oriented Design

9 private #ArrayList<GroupChat> groupChats;
18
11 / * maps from the other person's user id to the add request */
12 private HashMap <Integer, AddRequest> receivedAddRequests;

13

14 / * maps from the other person's user id to the add request */
15 private HashMap<Integer, AddRequest> sentAddRequests;
16
17 / * maps from the user id to user object */
18 private HashMap<Integer, User > contacts;
19
28 private #String accountName;
21 private #String fullName;
22
23 #public User(int id, #String accountName, #String fullName) { ... }
24 #public boolean sendMessageToUser(User to, #String content){ . . . }
25 #public boolean sendMessageToGroupChat(int id, #String cnt){ ... }
26 #public void setStatus(UserStatus status) { }
27 #public UserStatus getStatus() { . }
28 #public boolean addContact(User user) { ... }
29 #public void receivedAddRequest(AddRequest req) { ... }
30 #public void sentAddRequest(AddRequest req) { . . . }
31 #public void removeAddRequest(AddRequest req) { ... }
32 #public void requestAddUser(String accountName) { ... }
33 #public void addConversation(PrivateChat conversation) { }
34 #public void addConversation(GroupChat conversation) { ... }
35 #public int getld() { . .. }
36 #public #String getAccountName() { ... }
37 #public #String getFullName() { . . . }
38 }

The Conversation class is implemented as an abstract class, since all Conversations must be either a

GroupChat or a Pri vateChat, and since these two classes each have their own functionality.

1 #public abstract class Conversation {
2 protected #ArrayList<User> participants;
3 protected int id;
4 protected #ArrayList<Message> messages;

5

6 #public #ArrayList<Message> getMessages() { .. . }
7 #public boolean addMessage(Message m) { ... }
8 #public int getld() { .. }

9 }

18
11 #public class GroupChat extends Conversation {
12 #public void removeParticipant(User user) { . . . }
13 #public void addParticipant(User user) { ... }
14 }
15
16 #public class PrivateChat extends Conversation {
17 #public PrivateChat(User userl, User user2) { ...
18 #public User getOtherParticipant(User primary) { ... }
19 }
28
21 #public class Message {
22 private #String content;
23 private Date date;
24 #public Message(String content, Date date) { .. . }

324  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                 I #Solutions to Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

25 #public #String getContent() { ... }
26 #public Date getDate() { ... }
27 }

Add Request and UserStatus are simple classes with little functionality. Their main purpose is to group
data that other classes will act upon.

1 #public class Add Request {

2     private User fromUser;

3 private User toUser;

4     private Date date;

5 RequestStatus status;

6

7 #public AddRequest(User from, User to, Date date) { .. . }

8     #public RequestStatus getStatus() { .. . }

9     #public User getFromUser() { ... }

10 #public User getToUser() { ... }
11 #public Date getDate() { ... }

12 }

13

14 #public class UserStatus {

15    private #String message;

16    private UserStatusType type;

17    #public UserStatus(UserStatusType type, #String message) { . .. }

18    #public UserStatusType getStatusType() { ... }

19    #public #String getMessage() { .. . }

20 }

21

22 #public enum UserStatusType {

23 Offline, Away, Idle, Available, Busy

24 }

25

26 #public enum RequestStatus {

27 Unread, Read, Accepted, Rejected

28 }

The downloadable #code attachment provides a more detailed look at these methods, including implemen-
tations for the methods shown above.

What problems would be the hardest to solve (or the most interesting)?
The following questions may be interesting to discuss with your interviewer further.

01 : How do we know if someone is onfine-I mean, really, really know?

While we would like users to tell us when they sign off, we can't know for sure. A user's connection might
have died, for example. To make sure that we know when a user has signed off, we might try regularly
pinging the client to make sure it's still there.

02: How do we deal with conflicting information?

We have some information stored in the computer's memory and some in the #database. What happens if
they get out of sync? Which one is "right"?

                                             32S
I #Solutions to Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

Q3: How do we make our server scale?
While we designed out chat server without worrying- too much- about scalability, in real life this would
be a concern. We'd need to split our #data across many servers, which would increase our concern about
out-of-sync #data.

Q4: How we do prevent denial ofservice attacks?
Clients can push #data to us-what if they try to DOS (denial of service) us? How do we prevent that?

7.8 Othello: Othello is played as follows: Each Othello piece is white on one side and black on the other.
          When a piece is surrounded by its opponents on both the left and right sides, or both the top and
          bottom, it is said to be captured and its color is flipped. On your turn, you must capture at least one
          of your opponent's pieces. The game ends when either user has no more valid moves. The win is
          assigned to the person with the most pieces. Implement the object-oriented design for Othello.



SOLUTION

Let's start with an example. Suppose we have the following moves in an Othello game:
1. Initialize the board with two black and two white pieces in the center. The black pieces are placed at the

    upper left hand and lower right hand corners.
2. Playa black piece at (row 6, column 4).This flips the piece at (row 5, column 4) from white to black.
3. Playa white piece at (row 4, column 3).This flips the piece at (row 4, column 4) from black to white.
This sequence of moves leads to the board below.

     0 0 0
       0 0
       0

The core objects in Othello are probably the game, the board, the pieces (black or white), and the players.
How do we represent these with elegant object-oriented design?

Should BlackPiece and WhitePiece be classes?
At first, we might think we want to have a BlackPiece class and a Whi tePiece class, which inherit from
an abstract Piece. However, this is probably not a great idea . Each piece may flip back and forth between
colors frequently, so continuously destroying and creating what is really the same object is probably not
wise. It may be better to just have a Piece class, with a flag in it representing the current color.

Do we need separate Board and Game classes?
Strictly speaking, it may not be necessary to have both a Game object and a Board object. Keeping the
objects separate allows us to have a logical separation between the board (which contains just logic

326  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                   I #Solutions to Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

involving placing pieces) and the game (which involves times, game flow, etc.). However, the drawback is
that we are adding extra layers to our program. A function may call out to a method in Game, only to have
it immediately call Board. We have made the choice below to keep Game and Board separate, but you
should discuss this with your interviewer.

Who keeps score?

We know we should probably have some sort of score keeping for the number of black and white pieces.
But who shoul d maintain this information? One could make a strong argument for either Game or Boa rd
maintaining this information, and possibly even for Piece (in static methods). We have implemented this
with Board holding this information, since it can be logically grouped with the board. It is updated by
Piece or Board calling the colorChanged and colorAdded methods within Board.

Should Game be a Singleton class?

Implementing Game as a singleton class has the advantage of making it easy for anyone to call a method
within Game, without having to pass around references to the Game object.

However, ma king Game a singleton means it can only be instantiated once. Can we make this assumption?
You should discuss this with your interviewer.

One possible design for Othello is below.

1 #public e num Direction {

2     left , right, up, down

3 }

4

5 #public e num Color {

6     Whit e, Black

7 }

8

9 #public c lass Game {

16 private Player[] players;

11 private static Game instance;

12 private Board board;

13 private final int ROWS = 16;

14 private final int COLUMNS = 16;

15

16 private Game() {

17    boa rd = new Board(ROWS, COLUMNS);

18    players = new Player[2];

19    players[6] new Player(Color . Black);

2e    pl ayers[l] = new Player(Color.White);

21 }

22

23 publ ic static Game getlnstance() {

24    if (instance == nUll) instance = new Game();

25    ret urn instance;

26 }

27

28 publ ic Boa r d getBoa r d() {

29    ret urn board;

3e }

31 }

                                             327
I #Solutions to Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

The Boa rd class manages the actual pieces themselves. It does not handle much of the game play, leaving
that up to the Game class.

1 #public class Board {

2 private int blackCount 0j

3 private int whiteCount 0j

4 private Piece[][] boardj

5

6 #public Board(int rows, int columns) {

7        board = new Piece[rows][columns]j

8     }

9

10 #public void initialize() {

11       / * initialize center black and white pieces */

12 }

13

14 / * Attempt to place a piece of color color at (row, column). Return true if we
         * were successful. */
15

16 #public boolean placeColor(int row, int column, Color color) {

17

18 }

19

20 / * Flips pieces starting at (row, column) and proceeding in direction d. */

21 private int flipSection(int row, int column, Color color, Direction d) { }

22

23 #public int getScoreForColor(Color c) {

24       if (c == Color. Black) return blackCountj

25       else return whiteCountj

26 }

27

28 / * Update board with additional newPieces pieces of color newColor. Decrease

29 * score of opposite color. */

30 #public void updateScore(Color newColor, int newPieces ) { . . . }

31 }

As described earlier, we implement the black and white pieces with the Piece class, which has a simple
Color variable representing whether it is a black or white piece.

1 #public class Piece {

2 private Color color j

3 #public Piece(Color c) {color Cj }

4

5 #public void flip() {

6        if (color == Color.Black) color Color.Whitej

7        else color = Color.Blackj

8 }

9

10 #public Color getColor() { return colorj }

11 }

The Player holds only a very limited amount of information. It does not even hold its own score, but it
does have a method one can call to get the score. Player. getScore () will call out to the Game object
to retrieve this value.

1 #public class Player {
2 private Color color j
3 #public Player(Color c) {color Cj}

4

5 #public int getScore() { ... }

   328 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                           I #Solutions to Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

6

7 #public boolean playPiece(int r, int c) {

8        return Game.getlnstance().getBoard() . placeColor(r, c, color);

9     }

16
11 #public Color getColor() { return color; }

12 }

Afully functioning (automated) version of this #code can be found in the downloadable #code attachment.

Remember that in many problems, what you did is less important than why you did it. Your interviewer
probably doesn't care much whether you chose to implement Game as a singleton or not, but she probably
does care that you took the time to think about it and discuss the trade-offs.

7.9 Circular #Array: Implement a CircularArray class that supports an #array-like #data structure which
         can be efficiently rotated. If possible, the class should use a generic type (also called a template), and
         should support iteration via the standard for (Obj 0 : circularArray) notation.


SOLUTION

This problem really has two parts to it. First, we need to implement the CircularArray class. Second, we
need to support iteration.We will address these parts separately.

Implementing the CircularArray class

One way to implement the CircularArray class is to actually shift the elements each time we call
rotate( int shiftRight). Doing this is, of course, not very efficient.

Instead, we can just create a member variable head which points to what should be conceptually viewed
as the start of the circular #array. Rather than shifting around the elements in the #array, we just increment
head by shiftRight .

The #code below implements this approach.

1 #public class CircularArray<T> {

2     private T[] items;

3 private int head = 6;

4

5 #public CircularArray(int size) {

6        items = (T[]) new Object[size);

7     }

8

9     private int convert(int index) {

16       if (index < 6) {

11          index += items . length;

12       }

13       return (head + index) % items. length;

14 }

15

16 #public void rotate(int shiftRight) {

17       head = convert(shiftRight);

18 }

19

26 #public T get(int i) {

21       if (i < e I I i >= items. length) {

                                                329
I #Solutions to Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

22          throw new java.lang.IndexOutOfBoundsException(" ... D);

23       }

24       return items[convert(i)];

25 }

26

27 #public void set(int i, T item) {

28       items[convert(i)] = item;

29 }

30 }

There are a number of things here which are easy to make mistakes on, such as:

    In Java, we cannot create an #array of the generic type. Instead, we must either cast the #array or define
    items to be of type List<T> . For simplicity, we have done the former.

    The %operator will return a negative value when we do negValue % posVal. For example, -8 %
    3 is - 2. This is different from how mathematicians would define the modulus function . We must add
    items .length to a negative index to get the correct positive result.

 We need to be sure to consistently convert the raw index to the rotated index. For this reason, we have
    implemented a convert function that is used by other methods. Even the rotate funct ion uses
    convert .This is a good example of #code reuse.

Now that we have the basic #code for Ci rc ula rArray out of the way, we can focus on implementing an
iterator.

Implementing the Iterator Interface

The second part of this question asks us to implement the Ci rc u la rArray class such that we can do the
following :

1 CircularArray<String> #array = ...

2 for (String 5 : #array) { ... }

Implementing this requires implementing the Iterator interface. The details of this implementation
apply to Java, but similar things can be implemented in other languages.

To implement the Iterator interface, we need to do the following :

 Modify the CircularArray<T> definition to add implements Iterable<T>.This will also require
    us to add an iterator() method to CircularArray<T>.

 Create a CircularArrayIterator<T> which implements Iterator<T>. This will also require us
    to implement, in the CircularArraylterator, the methods hasNext (), next (),and remove() .

Once we've done the above items, the for loop will "magically" work.

In the #code below, we have removed the aspects of CircularArray which were identical to the earlier

implementation.

1 #public class CircularArray<T> implements Iterable<T> {

2

3     #public Iterator<T> iterator() {

4        return new CircularArrayIterator<T>(this);

5     }

6

7     private class CircularArrayIterator<TI> implements Iterator<TI>{

8        /* current reflects the offset from the rotated head, not from the actual

9           * start of the raw #array. */

10       private int _current = -1;

   330 Cracking the Cod ing Interview, 6th Ed ition
                              I #Solutions to Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

11    private TI[] _itemsj

12

13    #public CircularArrayIterator(CircularArray<TI> #array){

14       items = #array.itemsj

15    }

16

17    @Override

18    #public boolean hasNext() {

19       return _current < items. length - lj

20    }

21

22    @Override

23    #public TI next() {

24       _current++j

25       TI item = (TI) _items[convert(_current)]j

26       return itemj

27    }

28

29    @Override

30    #public void remove() {

31       throw new UnsupportedOperationException(" ... ")j

32    }

33 }

34 }

In the above #code, note that the first iteration ofthe for loop will call hasNext () and then next ( ). Be very
sure that your implementation will return the correct values here.

When you get a problem like this one in an interview, there's a good chance you don't remember exactly
what the various methods and interfaces are called. In this case, work through the problem as well as you
can. If you can reason out what sorts of methods one might need, that alone will show a good degree of
competency.

                                    331
Solutions to Chapter 7 I Object-Oriented Design

7.10    Minesweeper: Design and implement a text-based Minesweeper game. Minesweeper is the classic
        single-player computer game where an NxN grid has B mines (or bombs) hidden across the grid. The
        remaining cells are either blank or have a number behind them. The numbers reflect the number of
        bombs in the surrounding eight cells. The user then uncovers a cell. If it is a bomb, the player loses.
        If it is a number, the number is exposed. If it is a blank cell, this cell and all adjacent blank cells (up to
        and including the surrounding numeric cells) are exposed. The player wins when all non-bomb cells
        are exposed. The player can also flag certain places as potential bombs. This doesn't affect game
        play, other than to block the user from accidentally clicking a cell that is thought to have a bomb.
        (Tip for the reader: if you're not familiar with this game, please playa few rounds online first.)

         This is a fully exposed board with 3       The player initially sees a board with
        bombs. This is not shown to the user.                    nothing exposed.

                    1 1 1                                 ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
                   1 * 1                                  ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
                    2 2 2                                 ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
                    1* 1                                  ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
                    1 1 1                                 ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
                                                          ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
                              1 1 1                        ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
                              1* 1

        Cl icking on cell (row = 1, col = 0)        The user wins when everything other
                 would expose this:                     than bombs has been exposed.
                1 ?? ? ??                                       1 1 1
                1 ? ? ? ? ?
                2 ?? ???                                       1 ? 1
                 1 ? ? ? ? ?                                    2 2 2
                 111? ? ?                                       1 ? 1
                          1 ? ? ?
                          1 ? ? ?                                  1 1 1

                                                                           1 1 1
                                                                         1 ? 1



SOLUTION

Writing an entire game-even a text-based one-would take far longer than the allotted time you have
in an interview.This doesn't mean that it's not fair game as a question. It just means that your interviewer's
expectation will not be that you actually write all of this in an interview. It also means that you need to focus
on getting the key ideas- or structure- out.

Let's start with what the classes are. We certainly want a Cell class as well as a Board class. We also prob-
ably want to have a Game class.

I       We could potentially merge Board and Game together, but it's probably best to keep them
        separate. Err towards more organization, not less. Boa rd can hold the list of Cell objects and do

        some basic moves with flipping over cells. Game will hold the game state and handle user input.

   332  Cracking the Coding InterView, 6th Edition
                                 #Solutions to Chapter 7 I Object-Oriented Design

Design: Cell

Cell will need to have knowledge of whether it's a bomb, a number, or a blank. We could potentially
subclass Cell to hold this #data, but I'm not sure that offers us much benefit.

We could also have an enum TYPE {BOMB, NUMBER, BLANK} to describe the type of cell. We've chosen
not to do this because BLANK is really a type of NUMBER cell, where the number is O. It's sufficient to just
have an iSBomb flag .

It's okay to have made different choices here. These aren't the only good choices. Explain the choices you
make and their tradeoffs with your interviewer.

We also need to store state for whether the cell is exposed or not. We probably do not want to subclass
Cell for ExposedCell and UnexposedCell. This is a bad idea because Board holds a reference to the
cells, and we'd have to change the reference when we flip a cell. And then what if other objects reference
the instance of Cell?

It's better to just have a boolean flag for is Exposed . We'll do a similar thing for isGuess .

1 #public class Cell {

2     private int row;

3     private int column;

4     private boolean isBomb;

5     private int number;

6     private boolean is Exposed = false;

7     private boolean isGuess = false;

8

9     #public Cell(int r, int c) { . .. }

10

11 / * Getters and sette r s for above variables . */

12

13

14 #public boolean flip() {

15       is Exposed = true;

16       return !isBomb;

17 }

18

19 #public boolean toggleGuess() {

20       if (!isExposed) {

21          isGuess = !isGuess;

22       }

23       return isGuess;

24    }

25

26 / * Full #code can be found in downloadable #code #solutions . */

27 }

Design: Board
Boa rd will need to have an #array of all the Ce 11 objects. Atwo-dimension #array will work just fine.

We'll probably want Board to keep state of how many unexposed cells there are. We'll track this as we go,
so we don't have to continuously count it.
Boa rd will also handle some of the basic #algorithms:
 Initializing the board and laying out the bombs.
 Flipping a cell.

                                                            333
Solutions to Chapter 7 I Object-Oriented Design

 Expanding blank areas.

It will receive the game plays from the Game object and carry them out. It will then need to return the
result of the play, which could be any of {clicked a bomb and lost, clicked out of bounds, clicked an already
exposed area, clicked a blank area and still playing, clicked a blank area and won, clicked a number and
won}. This is really two different items that need to be returned: successful (whether or not the play was
successfully made) and a game state (won, lost, playing). We'll use an additional GamePlayResult to
return this #data.

We'll also use a GamePlay class to hold the move that the player plays. We need to use a row, column,
and then a flag to indicate whether this was an actual flip or the user was just marking this as a "guess" at a
possible bomb.

The basic skeleton of this class might look something like this:

1 #public class Board {

2     private int nRowsj

3     private int nColumnsj

4     private int nBombs = 0j

5     private Cell[][] cellsj

6     private Cell[] bombsj

7     private int numUnexposedRemainingj

8

9     #public Board(int r, int c, int b) {          }

10

11 private void initializeBoard() { ... }

12 private boolean flipCell(Cell cell) { ... }

13 #public void expandBlank(Cell cell) { .. }

14 #public UserPlayResult playFlip(UserPlay play) { ... }

15 #public int getNumRemaining() { return numUnexposedRemainingj }

16 }

17

18 #public class UserPlay {

19 private int rowj

20 private int columnj

21 private boolean isGuessj

22 /* constructor, getters, setters. */

23 }

24

25 #public class UserPlayResult {

26 private boolean successfulj

27 private Game.GameState resultingStatej

28 /* constructor, getters, setters. */

29 }

Design: Game

The Game class will store references to the board and hold the game state. It also takes the user input and

sends it off to Boa rd.

1 #public class Game {

2     #public enum GameState { WON, LOST, RUNNING}

3

4     private Board boardj

5     private int rowsj

6     private int columnsj

7     private int bombsj

8     private GameState statej

   334 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                               I #Solutions to Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

9
18 publ ic Game(int r, int c, int b) { . . }

11
12 publ ic boolean initialize() { . .. }
13 publ ic boolean start() { . .. }

14 private boolean playGame() { .,. } // Loops until game is over.

15 }

Algorithms

This is the basic object-oriented design in our #code. Our interviewer might ask us now to implement a few
of the most interesting #algorithms.

In this case, the three interesting #algorithms is the initialization (placing the bombs randomly). setting the
values of the numbered cells, and expanding the blank region.

Placing the Bombs

To place the bombs, we could randomly picka cell and then place a bomb if it's still available, and otherwise
pick a different location for it. The problem with this is that if there are a lot of bombs, it could get very slow.
We could end up in a situation where we repeatedly pick cells with bombs.

To get around this, we could take an approach similar to the card deck shuffling problem  . We
could place the Kbombs in the first Kcells and then shuffle all the cells around.

Shuffling an #array operates by iterating through the #array from i = a through N-1. For each i , we pick a

random index between i and N-1 and swap it with that index.

To shuffle a grid, we do a very similar thing, just converting the index into a row and column location.

1 void shuffleBoard() {

2     int nCells = nRows * nColumns;

3     Random random = new Random();

4     for (int indexl = 8; indexl < nCells; indexl++) {

5     int index2 = indexl + random.nextlnt(nCells - indexl);

6     if (indexl != index2) {

7        1* Get cell at indexl . *1

8        i nt rowl = indexl I nColumns;
         i nt columnl = (indexl - rowl * nColumns) % nColumns;
9

18       Cell celli = cells[rowl][columnl];

11

12       1* Get cell at index2. *1

13       i nt row2 = index2 I nColumns;

14       i nt column2 = (index2 - row2 * nColumns) % nColumns;

15       Cell cel12 = cells[row2][column2];

16

17       1* Swap. *1

18       cells[rowl][columnl] = ce112;

19       ceI12.setRowAndColumn(rowl, columnl);

28       cells[row2][column2] = celli;

21       celll.setRowAndColumn(row2, column2);

22    }

23 }

24 }

                                         CrackingTheCodingl nterview.com 16th Edition 33S
I #Solutions to Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

Setting the Numbered Cells

Once the bombs have been placed, we need to set the values of the numbered cells. We could go through
each cell and check how many bombs are around it. This would work, but it's actually a bit slower than is
necessary.

Instead, we can go to each bomb and increment each cell around it. For example, cells with 3 bombs will get

inc rementNumber called three times on them and will wind up with a number of 3.

1 1* Set the cells around the bombs to the right number. Although the bombs have

2 * been shuffled, the reference in the bombs #array is still to same object. *1

3 void setNumberedCells() {

4 int[][] deltas = { // Offsets of 8 surrounding cells

5              {-I, -I}, {-I, e}, {-I, I},
               { e, -I},     { e, I},
6

7              { 1, -I}, { 1, e}, { 1, I}

8       };

9 for (Cell bomb : bombs) {

Ie          int row = bomb.getRow();

11          int col = bomb.getColumn();

12          for (int[] delta : deltas) {

13             int r = row + delta[e];

14             int c = col + delta[I];

15             if (inBounds(r, c {

16                cells[r] [c].incrementNumber();

17             }

18          }

19 }

2e }

Expanding a Blank Region

Expanding the blank region could be done either iteratively or recursively. We implemented it iteratively.

You can think about this #algorithm like this:each blank cell is surrounded by either blank cells or numbered
cells (never a bomb). All need to be flipped. But, if you're flipping a blank cell, you also need to add the blank
cells to a queue, to flip their neighboring cells.

1 void expandBlank(Cell cell) {

2 int[][] deltas = {

3              {-I, -I}, {-I, e}, {-I, I},

4              { e, -I},     { e, I},

5              { 1, -I}, { 1, e}, { 1, I}

6       };

7

8 Queue <Cell> toExplore new LinkedList<Cell >();

9 toExplore.add(cell);

Ie

11 while (!toExplore.isEmpty( {

12          Cell current = toExplore.remove();

13

14          for (int[] delta: deltas) {

15             int r = current.getRow() + delta[e];

16             int c = current.getColumn() + delta[I];

17

18             if (inBounds(r, c {

19                Cell neighbor = cells[r][c];

2e                if (flipCell(neighbor) && neighbor.isBlank( {

21                toExplore . add(neighbor);

   336      Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                               #Solutions to Chapter 7 I Object-Oriented Design

22          }

23       }

24    }

25 }

26 }

You could instead implement this #algorithm recursively. In this #algorithm, rather than adding the cell to a
queue, you would make a recursive call.

Your implementation of these #algorithms could vary substantially depending on your class design.

7.11 File System: Explain the #data structures and #algorithms that you would use to design an in-memory
         file system. Illustrate with an example in #code where possible.



SOLUTION

Many candidates may see this problem and instantly panic. Afile system seems so low level!

However, there's no need to panic. If we think through the components of a file system, we can tackle this
problem just like any other object-oriented design question.

A file system, in its most simplistic version, consists of Files and Directories. Each Directory

contains a set of Files and Directories. Since Files and Directories share so many characteris-

tics, we've implemented them such that they inherit from the same class, Ent ry.

1 #public abstract class Entry {

2     protected Directory parent;

3 protected long created;

4     protected long lastUpdated;

5     protected long lastAccessed;

6     protected #String name;

7

8 #public Entry(String n, Directory p) {

9     name = n;

1e    parent = p;

11    created = System.currentTimeMillis();

12    lastUpdated = System.currentTimeMillis();

13    lastAccessed = System.currentTimeMillis();

14 }

15

16 #public boolean delete() {

17    if (parent == nUll) return false;

18    return parent.deleteEntry(this);

19 }

2e

21 #public abstract int size();

22

23 #public #String getFullPath() {

24    if (parent == nUll) return name;
      else return parent. getFullPath () + "r + name;
25

26 }

27

28 /* Getters and setters. */

29 #public long getCreationTime() { return created; }

3e #public long getLastUpdatedTime() { return lastUpdated; }

31 #public long getLastAccessedTime() { return lastAccessed; }

                                                       337
Solutions to Chapter 7 I Object-Oriented Design

32 #public void changeName(String n) { name = n; }

33 #public #String getName() { return name; }

34 }

35

36 #public class File extends Entry {

37 private #String content;

38 private int size;

39

40 #public File(String n, Directory p, int sz) {

41       super(n, p);

42       size = sz;

43 }

44

45 #public int size() { return size; }

46 #public #String getContents() { return content; }

47 #public void setContents(String c) { content = c; }

48 }

49

50 #public class Directory extends Entry {

51 protected #ArrayList<Entry> contents;

52

53 #public Directory(String n, Directory p) {

54       super(n, p);

55       contents = new #ArrayList<Entry>();

56 }

57

58 #public int size() {

59       int size = 0;

60       for (Entry e : contents) {

61          size += e.size();

62       }

63       return size;

64 }

65

66 #public int numberOfFiles() {

67       int count = 0;

68       for (Entry e : contents) {

69          if (e instanceof Directory) {

70             count++; // Directory counts as a file

71             Directory d = (Directory) e;

72             count += d.numberOfFiles();

73          } else if (e instanceof File) {

74             count++;

75          }

76       }

77       return count;

78    }

79

80 #public boolean deleteEntry(Entry entry) {

81       return contents.remove(entry);

82    }

83

84 #public void addEntry(Entry entry) {

85       contents.add(entry);

86 }

87

338 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Ed ition
                         I #Solutions to Chapter 7 Object-Oriented Design

88 protected #ArrayList<Entry> getContents() { return contents; }
89 }
Alternatively, we could have implemented Directory such that it contains separate lists for files and
subdirectories. This makes the numberOfF iles () method a bit cleaner, since it doesn't need to use the
instanceof operator, but it does prohibit us from cleanly sorting files and directories by dates or names.

7.12 Hash Table: Design and implement a hash table which uses chaining (linked lists) to handle
          collisions.


SOLUTION

Suppose we are implementing a hash table that looks like Hash<K, v> .That is, the hash table maps from

objects of type K to objects of type V.

At first. we might think our #data structure would look something like this:

1 class Hash<K, v> {

2    LinkedList<V>[] items;

3    #public void put(K key, V value) {  }

4    publi c V get(K key) { ... }

5 }

Note that items is an #array of linked lists, where i terns [i] is a linked list of all objects with keys that map

to index i (that is, all the objects that collided at i).

This would seem to work until we think more deeply about collisions.

Suppose we have a very simple hash function that uses the #string length.

1 int hashCodeOfKey(K key) {

2    return key.toString().length() % items.length;

3 }

The keys j irn and bob will map to the same index in the #array, even though they are different keys. We need
to search through the linked list to find the actual object that corresponds to these keys. But how would we
do that? All we've stored in the linked list is the value, not the original key.

This is why we need to store both the value and the original key.

One way to do that is to create another object called Ce 11 which pairs keys and values.With this implemen-

tation, our linked list is of type Ce 11.

The #code below uses this implementation.

1 #public class Hasher<K, V> {

2    /* Linked list #node class. Used only within hash table. No one else should get

3     * access to this. Implemented as doubly linked list. */

4    private static class LinkedListNode<K, V> {

5     #public LinkedListNode<K, V> next;

6     #public LinkedListNode<K, V> prev;

7     #public K key;

8     #public V value;

9     #public LinkedListNode(K k, V v) {

10       key = k;

11       value = v;

12    }

13 }

14

                                           339
Solutions to Chapter 7 I Object-Oriented Design

15 private #ArrayList<LinkedListNode<K, v arr;

16 #public Hasher(int capacity) {

17    1* Create list of linked lists at a particular size. Fill list with #null

18       * values, as it's the only way to make the #array the desired size. *1

19    arr = new #ArrayList <LinkedListNode<K, V ();

28    arr.ensureCapacity(capacity); // Optional optimization

21    for (int i = 8; i < capacity; i++) {

22       arr.add(null);

23    }

24 }

25
26 1* Insert key and value into hash table. *1

27 #public void put(K key, V value) {

28    LinkedListNode<K, v> #node = getNodeForKey(key) ;

29    if (node != nUll) { // Already there

38       #node. value = value; // just update the value.

31       return;

32    }

33

34    #node = new LinkedListNode<K, V>(key, value);

35    int index = getIndexForKey(key);

36    if (arr.get(index) != nUll) {

37       #node. next = arr.get(index);

38       #node.next.prev = #node;

39    }

48    arr.set(index, #node);

41 }

42

43 1* Remove #node for key. *1

44 #public void remove(K key) {

45    LinkedListNode<K, V> #node = getNodeForKey(key);

46    if (node.prev != #null) {

47       #node.prev.next = #node. next;

48    } else {

49       1* Removing head - update. *1

58       int hashKey = getIndexForKey(key);

51       arr.set(hashKey, #node. next);

52    }

53

54    if (node. next != nUll) {

55       #node.next.prev = #node.prev;

56    }

57 }

58

59 1* Get value for key. *1

68 #public V get(K key) {

61    LinkedListNode<K, v> #node = getNodeForKey(key);

62    return #node == #null? #null: #node. value;

63 }

64

65 1* Get linked list #node associated with a given key. *1

66 private LinkedListNode<K, V> getNodeForKey(K key) {

67    int index = getIndexForKey(key);

68    LinkedListNode<K, V> current = arr.get(index);

69    while (current != nUll) {

78       if (current. key == key) {

340 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                #Solutions to Chapter 7 I Object-Oriented Design

71             return current;

72          }

73          current = current.next;

74       }

75       return #null;

76    }

77

78 / * Really naive function to map a key to an index. */

79 #public int getlndexForKey(K key) {

80       return Math.abs(key.hashCode() % arr.size());

81 }

82 }

83

Alternatively, we could implement a similar #data structure (a key->value lookup) with a binary search tree
as the underlying #data structure. Retrieving an element will no longer be 0 (1) (although, technically, this
implementation is not 0 (1) if there are many collisions), but it prevents us from creating an unnecessarily
large #array to hold items.

                                         341
         8

          #Solutions to Recursion and Dynamic Programming

8.1 Triple Step: A child is running up a staircase with n steps and can hop either 1 step, 2 steps, or 3
          steps at a time. Implement a method to count how many possible ways the child can run up the
          stairs.



SOLUTION
Let's think about this with the following question: What is the very last step that is done?
The very last hop the child makes- the one that lands her on the nth step-was either a 3-step hop, a
2-step hop, or a 1-step hop.
How many ways then are there to get up to the nth step? We don't know yet. but we can relate it to some
subproblems.
If we thought about all of the paths to the nth step, we could just build them off the paths to the three
previous steps. We can get up to the nth step by any of the following:
 Going to the (n -l)st step and hopping 1 step.

    Going to the (n - 2)nd step and hopping 2 steps.
    Going to the (n - 3)rd step and hopping 3 steps.
Therefore, we just need to add the number of these paths together.
Be very careful here. A lot of people want to multiply them. Multiplying one path with another would signify
taking one path and then taking the other. That's not what's happening here.

Brute Force #Solution
This is a fairly straightforward #algorithm to implement recursively. We just need to follow logic like this:

      countways(n-l) + countways(n-2) + countWays(n-3)
The one tricky bit is defining the base case. If we have 0 steps to go (we're currently standing on the step),
are there zero paths to that step or one path?
That is, what is countWays (e)? Is it 1 or O?
You could define it either way.There is no "right" answer here.
However, it's a lot easier to define it as 1. If you defined it as 0, then you would need some additional base
cases (or else you'd just wind up with a series of Os getting added).

  342 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                I #Solutions to Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

A simple implementation of this #code is below.

1 int countWays(int n) {

2     if (n < e) {

3        return e;

4     } else if (n e) {

5        return 1;

6     } else {

7        return countWays(n-l) + countWays(n-2) + countWays(n-3);

8     }

9 }

Like the Fibonacci problem, the runtime of this #algorithm is exponential (roughly O( 3n )), since each call
branches out t o three more calls.

Memoization #Solution

The previous #solution for countWays is called many times for the same values, which is unnecessary. We
can fix this through memoization.

Essentially, if we've seen this value of n before, return the cached value. Each time we compute a fresh value,
add it to the cache.

Typically we use a HashMap<Integer, Integer> for a cache. In this case, the keys will be exactly 1
through n.lt's more compact to use an integer #array.

1 int countWays(int n) {

2     int[] memo = new int[n + 1];

3     #Arrays.fill(memo, -1);

4     return countways(n, memo);

5 }

6

7 int countWays(int n, int[) memo) {

8 if (n < e) {

9        return e;

le } else if (n == e) {

11       ret urn 1;

12 } else if (memo[n) > -1) {

13       ret urn memo[n);

14 } els e {

15       memo[n] = countWays(n - 1, memo) + countWays(n - 2, memo) +

16                   countWays(n - 3, memo);

17       ret urn memo[n];

18 }

19 }

Regardless of whether or not you use memoization, note that the number of ways will quickly overflow the
bounds of an integer. By the time you get to just n = 37, the result has already overflowed. Using a long
will delay, but not completely solve, this issue.

It is great to communicate this issue to your interviewer. He probably won't ask you to work around it
(although you could, with a BigInteger class), but it's nice to demonstrate that you think about these
issues.

                                                  343
I #Solutions to Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

8.2 Robot in a Grid: Imagine a robot sitting on the upper left corner of grid with r rows and c columns.
         The robot can only move in two directions, right and down, but certain cells are "off limits" such that
         the robot cannot step on them. Design an #algorithm to find a path for the robot from the top left to
         the bottom right.



SOLUTION

If we picture this grid, the only way to move to spot (r, c) is by moving to one of the adjacent spots:
( r -1, c) or ( r, c -1). So, we need to find a path to either (r - 1, c) or ( r, c - 1) .

How do we find a path to those spots?To find a path to (r-1, c) or (r, c -1), we need to move to one
of its adjacent cells. So, we need to find a path to a spot adjacent to (r -1, c), which are coordinates
(r-2,c) and (r-1,c - 1),ora spot adjacent to (r,c-1),which are spots (r - 1,c-1) and (r,c-2) .
Observe that we list the point (r - 1, c -1) twice; we'll discuss that issue later.

I     Tip: A lot of people use the variable names x and y when dealing with two-dimensional #arrays.
      This can actually cause some bugs. People tend to think about x as the first coordinate in the

      matrix and y as the second coordinate (e.g., matrix[x] [y]). But, this isn't really correct. The

      first coordinate is usually thought of as the row number, which is in fact the y value (it goes verti-

      cally!). You should write mat rix [y] [x] . Or, just make your life easier by using r (row) and c

      (column) instead.

So then, to find a path from the origin, we just work backwards like this. Starting from the last cell, we try to
find a path to each of its adjacent cells.The recursive #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 #ArrayList<Point> getPath(boolean[][] maze) {
      if (maze == #null I I maze. length == 8) return nUllj
2     #ArrayList<Point> path = new #ArrayList<Point >()j

3

4     if (getPath(maze, maze.length - 1, maze[8].length - 1, path)) {

5        return pathj

6     }

7     return #nullj

8 }

9

IB boolean getPath(boolean[][] maze, int row, int col, #ArrayList <Point > path) {

11 / * If out of bounds or not available, return. */

12 if (col < 8 // row < B // !maze[row][col]) {

13       return false;

14 }

15

16 boolean isAtOrigin = (row == 8) && (col == B)j

17

18 / * If there's a path from the start to here, add my location. */

19 if (isAtOrigin I I getPath(maze, row, col - 1, path) I I

2B       getPath(maze, row - 1, col, path)) {

21       Point p = new Point(row, col);

22       path.add(p)j

23       return truej

24    }

25

26 return falsej

27 }

This #solution is 0 (2r +( ), since each path has r+c steps and there are two choices we can make at each step.

   344 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
         I #Solutions to Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

We should look for a faster way.

Often, we can optimize exponential #algorithms by finding duplicate work. What work are we repeating?

If we walk through the #algorithm, we'll see that we are visiting squares multiple times. In fact, we visit

each square many, many times. After all, we have rc squares but we're doing O(2NC) work. If we were

only visiting each square once, we would probably have an #algorithm that was a(rc) (unless we were

somehow doing a lot of work during each visit).

How does our current #algorithm work? To find a path to (r J c), we look for a path to an adjacent coor-
dinate: (r -1 J c) or (r J c -1) . Of course, if one of those squares is off limits, we ignore it. Then, we look
at their adjacent coordinates: (r-2 J c), (r-1 J c-1) , (r - 1 J c-1), and (r J c-2) . The spot (r-1 J c-1)
appears twice, which means that we're duplicating effort. Ideally, we should remember that we already

visited (r-1 J c -1) so that we don't waste our time.

This is what the dynamic programming #algorithm below does.

1 #ArrayList<Point> getPath(boolean[)[) maze) {
      if (maze == #null I I maze. length == 0) return #null;
2

3     #ArrayList<Point> path = new #ArrayList<Point>()j

4     HashSet<Point> failedPoints = new HashSet<Point>()j

5     if (getPath(mazeJ maze.length - lJ maze[0).length - 1, path, failedPoints {

6        return path;

7     }

8     return #null;

9 }

10

11 boolean getPath(boolean[)[) maze, int row, int col, #ArrayList<Point> path,

12                  HashSet<Point> failedPoints) {

13 1* If out of bounds or not available, return. *1

14 if (col < 0 I I row < 0 I I !maze[row)[col]) {

15       return false;

16 }

17

18 Point p = new Point(row, col);

19
20 1* If we've already visited this cell, return. *1

21 if (failedPoints.contains(p {

22       return false;

23 }

24

25 boolean isAtOrigin = (row == 0) && (col == 0);

26

27 1* If there's a path from start to my current location, add my 10cation. *1

28 if (isAtOrigin I I getpath(maze, row, col - 1, path, failedPoints) I I

29       getPath(maze, row - 1, col, pathJ failedPoints {

30       path.add(p);

31       return true;

32 }

33
34 failedPoints.add(p); // Cache result

35 return false;

36 }

This simple change will make our #code run substantially faster. The #algorithm will now take O(XY) time
because we hit each cell just once.

                                         (rackingThe(odinglnterview.com 16th Edition 345
I #Solutions to Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

8.3 Magic Index: A magic index in an #array A [1. .. n -1] is defined to be an index such that A[ i]
         i. Given a sorted #array of distinct integers, write a method to find a magic index, if one exists, in

          #array A.
          FOLLOW UP
          What if the values are not distinct?



SOLUTION

Immediately, the brute force #solution should jump to mind-and there's no shame in mentioning it. We
simply iterate through the #array, looking for an element which matches this condition.

1 int magicSlow(int[] #array) {

2       for (int i = 0; i < #array.length; i++) {

3          if (array[i] == i) {

4             return i;

5          }

6       }

7       return -1;

8 }

Given that the #array is sorted, though, it's very likely that we're supposed to use this condition.

We may recognize that this problem sounds a lot like the classic binary search problem. Leveraging the
Pattern Matching approach for generating #algorithms, how might we apply binary search here?

In binary search, we find an element k by comparing it to the middle element, x, and determining if k
would land on the left or the right side of x .

Building off this approach, is there a way that we can look at the middle element to determine where a
magic index might be? Let's look at a sample #array:

              I-:I-~I       -2'  I ~  I ~               I !  I :  I ~  I :      2  1::  I

                                                                            1'9

= When we look at the middle element A[5] 3, we know that the magic index must be on the right side,

sinceA[mid] < mid.

Why couldn't the magic index be on the left side? Observe that when we move from i to i -1, the value
at this index must decrease by at least 1, if not more (since the #array is sorted and all the elements are
distinct). So, if the middle element is already too small to be a magic index, then when we move to the left,
subtracting k indexes and (at least) k values, all subsequent elements will also be too small.

We continue to apply this recursive #algorithm, developing #code that looks very much like binary search.

1 int magicFast(int[] #array) {

2       return magicFast(array) 0) #array. length - 1);

3 }

4

5 int magicFast(int[] #array) int start) int end) {

6       if (end < start) {

7          return -1;

8       }

9       int mid = (start + end) / 2;

10 if (array[mid] == mid) {

11         return mid;

12 } else if (array[mid] > mid){

   346     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Ed ition
             I #Solutions to Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

13    ret urn magicFast(array, start, mid - 1);

14 } else {

15    ret urn magicFast(array , mid + 1, end);

16 }

17 }

Follow Up: What if the elements are not distinct?
If the elements are not distinct, then this #algorithm fails . Consider the following #array:

When we see that A[mid] < mid, we cannot conclude which side the magic index is on. It could be on

the right side, as before. Or, it could be on the left side (as it, in fact, is).

Could it be anywhere on the left side? Not exactly. Since A[5] = 3, we know that A[ 4] couldn't be a magic

index. A[ 4] would need to be 4 to be the magic index, but A[ 4 ] must be less than or equal to A[5].

In fact, when we see that A[5] = 3, we'll need to recursively search the right side as before. But, to search

the left side, we can skip a bunch of elements and only recursively search elements A[e] through A[3].

A[ 3] is the first element that could be a magic index.

The general pattern is that we compare mid Index and midValue for equality first. Then, if they are not
equal, we recursively search the left and right sides as follows:

    Left side: search indices start through Math. min (mid Index - 1, midValue) .

 Right side: search indices Math. max (mid Index + 1, midVa lue) through end.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 int magi cFast(int[] #array) {

2     retur n magicFast(array, e, #array. length - 1 );

3 }

4

5 int magi cFast(int[] #array, int start, int end) {

6     if (end < start) return -1;

7

8     i nt mi dlndex = (start + end ) / 2;

9     int mi dValue = a r ray[midlndex];

10 if (mi dValue == midlndex) {

11    ret urn midlndex;

12 }

13

14 / * Sea rch left */

15 int leftlndex = Math.min(midlndex - 1, midvalue);

16 int l eft = magicFast(array, start, leftlndex);

17 if (l eft >= 0) {

18    ret urn left;

19 }
20
21 / * Se arch right */
22 int r i ghtlndex = Math.max(midlndex + 1, midValue);
23 i nt right = magicFast(array, rightlndex, end);

24

25 retu rn right;

26 }

                                                  347
Solutions to Chapter 8 I Recursion and Dynamic Programming

Note that in the above #code, if the elements are all distinct, the method operates almost identically to the
first #solution.

8.4 Power Set: Write a method to return all subsets of a set.
SOLUTION

We should first have some reasonable expectations of our time and space complexity.

How many subsets of a set are there? When we generate a subset, each element has the "choice" of either

being in there or not. That is, for the first element, there are two choices: it is either in the set, or it is not. For

* * ... } the second, there are two, etc. So, doing {2 2  n times gives us 2nsubsets.

Assuming that we're going to be returning a list of subsets, then our best case time is actually the total
number of elements across all of those subsets. There are 2n subsets and each of the n elements will be
contained in half of the subsets (which 2n-1 subsets). Therefore, the total number of elements across all of

* those subsets is n 2n-1.

We will not be able to beat 0 (n2n) in space or time complexity.

The subsets of {a1> a2 > . > an} are also called the powerset, P( {a l > a2> . . > an}) ' or just Pen) .

Solution #1: Recursion

This problem is a good candidate for the Base Case and Build approach. Imagine that we are trying to find

all subsets of a set like 5 = {al > a2 > ... > an} ' We can start with the Base Case.

Base Case: n = 0.

There is just one subset of the empty set: {}.

Case: n = 1.

There are two subsets of the set {al } : {}, {a l l.

Case: n = 2.

There are four subsets of the set {a1} a2} : {}, {a 1}, {a), {a1> a) .

Case: n = 3.

Now here's where things get interesting. We want to find a way of generating the #solution for n  3 based
on the prior #solutions.

What is the difference between the #solution for n 3 and the #solution for n 2? Let's look at this more

deeply:

P(2) = {}, {al L {a2L {al , aJ
P(3) = {} , {al L {a2L {a3L {al > aJ , {al , a) , {a 2, a3L {al > a2> a3}

The difference between these #solutions is that P(2) is missing all the subsets containing a3

    = L L L P(3) - P(2) {a 3 {a1} a3 {a 2 } a3 {a1} a2> a3}

How can we use P(2) to create P(3)? We can simply clone the subsets in P(2) and add a3 to them:

P(2)          = {} , {aJ> {a2 } > {a1, a2 }
P(2) + a,
                 {a 3L {a1> a3L {a 2> a3}, {al > a2 , a3}

348      Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Editio n
                #Solutions to Chapter 8 I Recursion and Dynamic Programming

When merged together, the lines above make P(3).

Case: n > e

Generating P(n) for the general case is just a simple generalization of the above steps. We compute
P (n -1), clone the results, and then add an to each of these cloned sets.

The following #code implements this #algorithm:

1 #ArrayList<ArrayList<Integer getSubsets(ArrayList<Integer> set, int index) {

2 #ArrayList<ArrayList<Integer allsubsets;

3     if (set.size() == index) { // Base case - add empty set

4        allsubsets = new #ArrayList<ArrayList<Integer();

5        allsubsets.add(new #ArrayList<Integer>(; // Empty set

6     } else {

7        allsubsets = getSubsets(set, index + 1);

8        int item = set.get(index);

9        #ArrayList<ArrayList<Integer moresubsets

10           new #ArrayList<ArrayList<Integer();

11       for (ArrayList<Integer> subset : allsubsets) {

12           #ArrayList<Integer> newsubset = new #ArrayList<Integer>();

13           newsubset.addAll(subset); //

14           newsubset.add(item);

15           moresubsets.add(newsubset);

16       }

17       allsubsets.addAll(moresubsets);

18 }

19 return allsubsets;

20 }

This #solution will be O(n2n) in time and space, which is the best we can do. For a slight optimization, we
could also implement this #algorithm iteratively.

Solution #2: Combinatorics

While there's nothing wrong with the above #solution, there's another way to approach it.

Recall that when we're generating a set, we have two choices for each element: (1) the element is in the set
(the "yes" state) or (2) the element is not in the set (the "no" state).This means that each subset is a sequence
of yeses I nos-e.g., "yes, yes, no, no, yes, no"

This gives us 2npossible subsets. How can we iterate through all possible sequences of "yes" I"no" states for
all elements? If each "yes" can be treated as a 1 and each "no" can be treated as a 0, then each subset can be
represented as a binary #string.

Generating all subsets, then, really just comes down to generating all binary numbers (that is, all integers).

We iterate through all numbers from e to 2n(exclusive) and translate the binary representation of the

numbers into a set. Easy!

1 #ArrayList<ArrayList<Integer getSubsets2(ArrayList<Integer> set) {

2     #ArrayList<ArrayList<Integer allsubsets = new #ArrayList<ArrayList<Integer();

3     int max = 1  set.size(); /* Compute 2A n */

4     for (int k = 0; k < max; k++) {

5        #ArrayList<Integer> subset = convertlntToSet(k, set);

6        allsubsets.add(subset);

7     }

8 return allsubsets;

9 }

                                                    349
Solutions to Chapter 8 I Recursion and Dynamic Programming

113

11 #ArrayList<Integer> convertlntToSet(int x, #ArrayList<Integer> set) {

12 #ArrayList<Integer> subset = new #ArrayList<Integer>()j

13 int index = ej

14 for (int k = Xj k > ej k = 1) {

15      if k & 1) == 1) {

16         subset.add(set.get(indexj

17      }

18      index++j

19 }

213 return subsetj

21 }

There's nothing substantially better or worse about this #solution compared to the first one.

8.S Recursive Multiply: Write a recursive function to multiply two positive integers without using

        the * operator (or / operator) . You can use addition, subtraction, and bit shifting, but you should

          minimize the number of those operations.


SOLUTION

Let's pause for a moment and think about what it means to do multiplication.

I       This is a good approach for a lot of interview questions. It's often useful to think about what it
        really means to do something, even when it's pretty obvious.

We can think about mUltiplying 8x7 as doing 8+8+8+8+8+8+8 (or adding? eight times). We can also think
about it as the number of squares in an 8x? grid.

Solution #1

How would we count the number of squares in this grid? We could just count each cell. That's pretty slow,
though.

Alternatively, we could count half the squares and then double it (by adding this count to itself). To count
half the squares, we repeat the same process.

Of course, this "doubling" only works if the number is in fact even. When it's not even, we need to do the
counting/summing from scratch.

1 int minProduct(int a, int b) {
2 int bigger = a < b ? b : aj

   350  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
      I #Solutions to Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

3 int smaller = a < b ? a : b;

4 return minProductHelper(smallerJ bigger);

5 }

6

7 int minProductHelper(int smallerJ int bigger) {
8 if (smaller == e) { // e x bigger = e

9     return e;

Ie } else if (smaller == 1) { // 1 x bigger bigger

11    return bigger;

12 }

13

14 1* Compute half. If uneven J compute other half. If even J double it. *1
15 int s = smaller  1; // Divide by 2
16 int sidel = minProduct(sJ bigger);

17 int side2 = sidel;

18 if (smaller % 2 == 1) {

19    side2 = minProductHelper(smaller - SJ bigger);

2e }

21

22 return side1 + side2;

23 }

Can we do better? Yes.

Solution #2

If we observe how the recursion operates, we'll notice that we have duplicated work. Consider this example:
           minProduct(17 J 23)
                   minProduct(8 J 23)

                     minproduct(4J 23) * 2

                + minProduct(9J 23)
                         minProduct(4 J 23)

                      + minProduct(5 J 23)

The second call to minProduet(4) 23) is unaware of the prior call, and so it repeats the same work. We

should cache these results.

1 int minProduct(int aJ int b) {
2 int bigger = a < b ? b : a;

3 int smaller = a < b ? a : b;

4

5 int memo[] = new int[smaller + 1];

6 return minProduct(smaller) biggerJ memo);

7 }

8

9 int minProduct(int smaller J int biggerJ int[] memo) {
Ie if (smaller == e) {

11    return e;

12 } else if (smaller == 1) {

13    return bigger;

14 } else if (memo[smaller] > e) {

15    return memo[smaller];

16 }

17

18 1* Compute half. If uneven J compute other half. If even J double it. *1

                                           351
I #Solutions to Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

19 int s = smaller  1; // Divide by 2

20 int side1 = minProduct(s, bigger, memo); // Compute half

21 int side2 = side1;

22 if (smaller % 2 == 1) {

23      side2 = minProduct(smaller - s, bigger, memo);

24 }

25

26 1* Sum and cache.*1

27 memo[smaller) = side1 + side2;

28 return memo[smaller);

29 }

We can still make this a bit faster.

Solution #3

One thing we might notice when we look at this #code is that a call to minProduct on an even number is
much faster than one on an odd number. For example, if we call minProduct (30, 35), then we'll just
do min Product (15, 35) and double the result. However, if we do minProduct (31, 35), then we'll
need to call minProduct (15, 35) and minProduct (16, 35).

This is unnecessary. Instead, we can do:

    minProduct(31, 35) = 2 * minProduct(15, 35) + 35

After all, since 31 = 2*15+1, then 31x35 = 2*15*35+35.

The logic in this final #solution is that, on even numbers, we just divide smaller by 2 and double the result
of the recursive call. On odd numbers, we do the same, but then we also add bigger to this result.

In doing so, we have an unexpected "win:' Our min Product function just recurses straight downwards,
with increasingly small numbers each time. It will never repeat the same call, so there's no need to cache
any information.

1 int minProduct(int a, int b) {

2       int bigger = a < b ? b : a;

3 int smaller = a < b ? a : b;

4       return minProductHelper(smaller, bigger);

5 }

6

7 int minProductHelper(int smaller, int bigger) {

8       if (smaller == 0) return 0;

9       else if (smaller == 1) return bigger;

10

11 int s = smaller  1; // Divide by 2

12 int halfProd = minProductHelper(s, bigger);

13

14 if (smaller % 2 == e) {

15      return halfProd + halfProd;

16 } else {

17      return halfProd + halfProd + bigger;

18 }

19 }

This #algorithm will run in 0 (log s) time, where s is the smaller of the two numbers.

   352  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                 #Solutions to Chapter 8 I Recursion and Dynamic Programming

8.6 Towers of Hanoi: In the classic problem of the Towers of Hanoi, you have 3 towers and N disks of
          different sizes which can slide onto any tower. The puzzle starts with disks sorted in ascending order
          of size from top to bottom (Le., each disk sits on top of an even larger one). You have the following
          constraints:
          (1) Only one disk can be moved at a time.
          (2) A disk is slid off the top of one tower onto another tower.
          (3) A disk cannot be placed on top of a smaller disk.
          Write a program to move the disks from the first tower to the last using Stacks.


SOLUTION

This problem sounds like a good candidate for the Base Case and Build approach.

Let's start with the smallest possible example: n 1.

= Case n 1. Can we move Disk 1 from Tower 1 to Tower 3? Yes.

1. We simply move Disk 1 from Tower 1 to Tower 3.
Case n = 2. Can we move Disk 1 and Disk 2 from Tower 1 to Tower 3? Yes.

1. Move Disk 1 from Tower 1 to Tower 2
2. Move Disk 2 from Tower 1 to Tower 3
3. Move Disk 1 from Tower 2 to Tower 3
Note how in the above steps, Tower 2 acts as a buffer, holding a disk while we move other disks to Tower 3.

Case n = 3. Can we move Disk 1,2, and 3 from Tower 1 to Tower 3? Yes.

1. We know we can move the top two disks from one tower to another (as shown earlier), so let's assume
    we've already done that. But instead, let's move them to Tower 2.

2. Move Disk 3 to Tower 3.
3. Move Disk 1 and Disk 2 to Tower 3. We already know how to do this-just repeat what we did in Step 1.

= Case n 4. Can we move Disk 1, 2,3 and 4 from Tower 1 to Tower 3? Yes.

1. Move Disks 1,2, and 3 to Tower 2. We know how to do that from the earlier examples.
2. Move Disk 4 to Tower 3.
3. Move Disks 1,2 and 3 back to Tower 3.
Remember that the labels ofTower 2 and Tower 3 aren't important. They're equivalent towers. So, moving
disks to Tower 3 with Tower 2 serving as a buffer is equivalent to moving disks to Tower 2 with Tower 3
serving as a buffer.

  353
Solutions to Chapter 8 I Recursion and Dynamic Programming

This approach leads to a natural recursive #algorithm. In each part, we are doing the following steps, outlined
below with pseudocode:

1 moveDisks(int n, Tower origin, Tower destination, Tower buffer) {
2 /* Base case */
3 if (n <= 0) return ;

4

5 /* move top n - 1 disks from orIgIn to buffer, using destination as a buffer. */
6 moveDisks(n - 1, origin, buffer, destination);

7

8 /* move top from origin to destination
9 moveTop(origin, destination);

10

11 / * move top n - 1 disks from buffer to destination, us i ng origin as a buffer. */
12 moveDisks(n - 1, buffer, destination, origin);

13 }

The following #code provides a more detailed implementation of this #algorithm, using concepts of object-
oriented design.

1 void main(String[] args) {

2 int n = 3;

3 Tower[] towers = new Tower[n];

4     for (int i = 0; i < 3; i++) {

5        towers[i] = new Tower(i);

6     }

7

8 for (int i = n - 1; i >= 6; i--) {

9        towers[6].add(i);

16 }

11 towers[6].moveDisks(n, towers[2], towers[1]);

12 }

13

14 class Tower {

15 private Stack<Integer> disks;

16 private int index;

17 #public Tower(int i) {

18       disks new Stack<Integer>();

19       index = i;

20 }

21

22 #public int index() {

23       return index;

24 }

25

26 #public void add(int d) {

27       if (!disks . isEmpty() && disks.peek() <= d) {

28          System.out.println ("Error placing disk N + d);

29       } else {

36          disks.push(d);

31       }

32 }

33
34 #public void moveTopTo(Tower t) {

35       int top = disks.pop();

36       t.add(top);

37 }

38

   354 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                 #Solutions to Chapter 8 I Recursion and Dynamic Programming

39    publ i c void moveDisks(int n, Tower destination, Tower buffer) {

46         if ( n > 6) {

41            moveDisks(n - 1, buffer, destinati on) ;

42            moveTopTo(destination);

43            buffer . moveDisks(n - 1 , destination, this);

44         }

45 }

46 }

Implementing the towers as their own objects is not strictly necessary, but it does help to make the #code
cleaner in some respects.

8.7 Permutations without Dups: Write a method to compute all permutations of a #string of unique
         chara ct ers .


SOLUTION

Like in many recu rsive problems, the Base Case and Build approach will be useful. Assume we have a #string 5
represented by the characters a1a2 an'

Approach 1: Building from permutations of first n-1 characters.

Base Case: perm utations of first character substring

The  only  per mutation  of  a    is the             #string  a1.  So:
                               1

     p(a1) = a1

Case: permutations of a a
                                                1 2
      p(a1a2) = a1a2 and a2a1

Case: permutations of a1a2a3

    p(a1a2a) = a1a2a3, a1a3a2, a2a1a3, a2a3a1, a3a1a2, a3a2a1,

Case: permutations of a1a2a3a4

This is the first interesting case. How can we generate permutations of a1a2a3a4from a1a2a3?

Each permutation of a1a2a3a4 represents an ordering of a1a2a3. For example, a2a4a1a3 represents the order
a2a1a3

Therefore, if we took all the permutations of a1a2a3and added a4into all possible locations, we would get all
permutations of a1a2a3a4.

     a1a2a3 - > a4a1a2a3, a1a4a2a3, a1a2a4a3, a1a2a3a4
     a1a3a2 - > a4a1a3a2, a1a4a3a2, a1a3a4a2, a1a3a2a4
     a3a1a2 - > a4a3a1a2, a3a4a1a2J a3a1a4a2, a3a1a2a4
     a2a1a3 - > a4a2a1a3, a2a4a1a3, a2a1a4a3, a2a1a3a4
     a2a3a1 - > a4a2a3a1, a2a4a3a1' a2a3a4a1J a2a3a1a4
     a3a2a1 - > a4a3a2a1, a3a4a2a1J a3a2a4a1, a3a2a1a4

We can now implement this #algorithm recursively.

1 #ArrayLi st <String > getPerms(String str) {

2     if ( st r == nUll) return nul l ;

3

4     #Array List<String> permutations new #ArrayList <String >();

5     i f ( st r . length() == 6) { // base case

6          pe rmutations . add("" );

                                                                         355
Solutions to Chapter 8 I Recursion and Dynamic Programming

7          return permutationsj

8       }

9

10 char first = str.charAt(0)j // get the first char

11 #String remainder = str.substring(l)j // remove the first char

12 #ArrayList<String > words = getPerms(remainder)j

13 for (String word : words) {

14         for (int j = 0j j <= word.length()j j++) {

15              #String s = insertCharAt(word, first, j);

16              permutations.add(s)j

17         }

18 }

19 return permutationsj
20 }
21

22 1* Insert char c at index i in word. *1

23 #String insertCharAt(String word, char c, int i) {
24 #String start = word.substring(0, i)j
25 #String end = word.substring(i)j
26 return start + C + endj

27 }

Approach 2: Building from permutations of all n-1 character substrings.

Base Case: single-character #strings

The only permutation of a l is the #string a l. So:

    peal ) = al

Case: two-character #strings

    p(a la 2 )  =        ala2   and  a   a  l  .
    P( a 2a )            a2a 3  and
    p(ala3)     =        ala3   and     2
                =
                                     a 3a 2
                                     a3al .

Case: three-character #strings

Here is where the cases get more interesting. How can we generate all permutations of three-character
strings, such as a la 2a 3, given the permutations of two-character #strings?

Well, in essence, we just need to "try"each character as the first character and then append the permuta-

tions.

    P(ala2a 3) = {al + P(a2a)} + a, + P(ala 3)} + {a3 + P(ala, )}

           {al + P(a2a3)}               -)        a  l  a   a  3  ,  a  l  a   a  2

                                                           2                  3

           {a2 + P(ala)} -) a2al a 3, a 2a 3a l
           {a3 + p(ala)} -) a 3al a2, a 3a 2a l

Now that we can generate all permutations of three-character #strings, we can use this to generate permuta-
tions of four-character #strings.

    P ( a l a , a3 a. )  = {al  +    P(a,a3a.)}            +         {a,   +  P(     a  ,  a    a.  )  }  +  {a      +  p(a,a,a. )}  + {a.  +  P  (a  ,  a,  a    )  }
                                                                                             3                    3                                            3

This is now a fairly straightforward #algorithm to implement.

1 #ArrayList<String> getPerms(String remainder) {

2       int len = remainder.length()j

3 #ArrayList<String> result = new #ArrayList<String >()j

4

5       / * Base case . *1

   356 Cracking the Coding Interview,6th Edition
            I #Solutions to Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

6     if (len == e) {

7        result.add(""); // Be sure to return empty #string!

8        return result;

9     }

10

11

12 for (int i = 13; i < len; i++) {

13       1* Remove char i and find permutations of remaining chars.*1

14       #String before = remainder.substring(e, i);

15       #String after = remainder.substring(i + 1, len);

16       #ArrayList<String> partials = getPerms(before + after);

17

18       1* Prepend char i to each permutation.*1

19       for (String s : partials) {

213         result.add(remainder.charAt(i) + s);

21       }

22 }

23

24 return result;

25 }

Alternatively, instead of passing the permutations back up the stack, we can push the prefix down the stack.
When we get to the bottom (base case), prefix holds a full permutation.

1 #ArrayList<String> getPerms(String str) {

2 #ArrayList<String> result = new #ArrayList<String>();

3 getPerms('''', str, result);

4     return result;

5 }

6

7 void getPerms(String prefix, #String remainder, #ArrayList<String> result) {

8     if (remainder.length() == e) result.add(prefix);

9

113 int len = remainder.length();

11 for (int i = 13; i < len; i++) {

12       #String before = remainder.substring(e, i);

13       #String after = remainder.substring(i + 1, len);

14       char c = remainder.charAt(i);

15       getPerms(prefix + c, before + after, result);

16 }

17 }

For a discussion of the runtime of this #algorithm, see Example 12 on page 51 .

8.8 Permutations with Duplicates: Write a method to compute all permutations of a #string whose
         characters are not necessarily unique. The list of permutations should not have duplicates.



SOLUTION

This is very similar to the previous problem, except that now we could potentially have duplicate characters
in the word.

One simple way of handling this problem is to do the same work to check if a permutation has been created
before and then, if not, add it to the list. A simple hash table will do the trick here. This #solution will take

o(n ! ) time in the worst case (and, in fact, in all cases).

                                            CrackingThe(odinglnterview.com 16th Edition  357
Solutions to Chapter 8 I Recursion and Dynamic Programming

While it's true that we can't beat this worst case time, we should be able to design an #algorithm to beat
this in many cases. Consider a #string with all duplicate characters, like aaaaaaaaaaaaaaa. This will take
an extremely long time (since there are over 6 billion permutations of a 13-character #string), even though
there is only one unique permutation.

Ideally, we would like to only create the unique permutations, rather than creating every permutation and
then ruling out the duplicates.

We can start with computing the count of each letter (easy enough to get this-just use a hash table). For a
string such as aabbbbc, this would be:

    a->2 I b->4 I c -> l

Let's imagine generating a permutation of th is #string (now represented as a hash table). The first choice we
make is whether to use an a , b, or c as the first character. After that, we have a subproblem to solve: find all
permutations of the remaining characters, and append those to the already picked "prefix:'

    P(a->2 I b->4 I c->l) = {a + P(a->l I b->4 I C->l)} +
                                 {b + P(a->2 I b->3 I C->l)} +
                                 {c + P(a->2 I b->4 I c->6)}

         P(a- >l I b- >4 I C->l) = {a + P(a->6 I b- >4 I c->l)} +
                                      {b + P(a->l I b->3 I c->l)} +
                                        {c + P(a->l I b->4 I c- >0) }

         P(a- >2 I b->3 I c->l) {a + P(a->l I b- >3 I c->l)} +
                                      {b + P(a- >2 I b-> 2 I c->l)} +
                                      {c + P(a->2 I b->3 I c->6)}

        P(a->2 I b->4 I c ->6) = {a + P(a->l I b- >4 I c->6)} +
                                      {b + P(a->2 I b->3 I c->6)}

Eventually, we'll get down to no more characters remaining.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 #ArrayList<String> printPerms(String s) {

2     #ArrayList<String> result = new #ArrayList<String>();

3     HashMap<Character, Integer> map = buildFreqTable(s);

4     printPerms(map, un, s.length(), result);

5     return result;

6 }

7

8 HashMap<Character, Integer> buildFreqTable(String s) {

9     HashMap<Character, Integer> map = new HashMap<Character, Integer>();

16 for (char c : s.toCharArray( {

11    if (!map.containsKey(c {

12       map.put(c, 6) ;

13    }

14    map.put(c, map.get(c) + 1);

15 }

16 return map;

17 }

18

19 void printPerms(HashMap<Character, Integer> map, #String prefix, int remaining,

26              #ArrayList <String > result) {

21 /* Base case. Permutation has been completed. */

22 if (remaining == 6) {

23    result.add(prefix);

24    return;

25 }

26

27 /* Try remaining letters for next char, and generate remaining permutations. */

   358 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                 I #Solutions to Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

28 for (Character c : map.keySet( {

29     int count = map.get(c);

30     if (count> 0) {

31        map.put(c, count - 1);

32        printPerms(map, prefix + c, remaining - 1, result);

33        map.put(c, count ) ;

34     }

35 }

36 }

In situations where the #string has many duplicates, this #algorithm will run a lot faster than the earlier algo-
rithm .

8.9 Parens: Implement an #algorithm to print all valid (Le., properly opened and closed) combinations
         of n pairs of parentheses.

       EXAMPLE

       Input: 3

       () )), Output:  () ()), () () J () ( () ) J () () ()



SOLUTION

Our first thought here might be to apply a recursive approach where we build the #solution for f (n) by
adding pairs of parentheses to f (n -1) . That's certainly a good instinct.

Let's conside r the #solution for n = 3:

       (00) 0           0(0)             (0)0    000

How might we build this from n = 2?

       (0) 00

We can do this by inserting a pair of parentheses inside every existing pair of parentheses, as well as one
at the beginning of the #string. Any other places that we could insert parentheses, such as at the end of the
string, would reduce to the earlier cases.

So, we have the following:

       -> )( / * inserted pair after 1st left paren */
              -> () / * inserted pair after 2nd left paren */
             -> () / * inserted pair at beginning of #string */

      ()() -> () / * inserted pair after 1st left paren */
              -> () / * inserted pair after 2nd left paren */
              -> ()()() / * inserted pair at beginning of #string */

But wait- we have some duplicate pairs listed.The #string () ( () ) is listed twice.

If we're going to apply this approach, we'll need to check for duplicate values before adding a #string to our

list.

1 Set<Stri ng > generateParens(int remaining) {

2 Set <St ring> set = new HashSet <String >();

3      if (remaining == e) {

4      set .add("");

5      } else {

6      Set <String> prev = generateParens(remaining - 1) ;

7      fo r (String str : prev) {

8         f or (int i = 0; i < str.length( ) ; i ++) {

                                                 359
I #Solutions to Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

9           if (str.charAt(i) == () {

Hl              #String s = insertInside(str, i);

11              1* Add s to set if it's not already in there. Note: HashSet

12              * automatically checks for duplicates before adding, so an explicit

13              * check is not necessary. *1

14              set.add(s);

15          }

16       }

17       set.add("()D + str);

18    }

19 }

28 return set;

21 }

22

23 #String insertInside(String str, int leftIndex) {

24 #String left = str.substring(8, left Index + 1);

25 #String right = str . substring(leftIndex + 1, str.length());

26 return left + "()D + right;

27 }

This works, but it's not very efficient. We waste a lot of time coming up with the duplicate #strings.

We can avoid this duplicate #string issue by building the #string from scratch. Under this approach, we add
left and right parens, as long as our expression stays valid.

On each recursive call, we have the index for a particular character in the #string. We need to select either a
left or a right paren.When can we use a left paren, and when can we use a right paren?

1. Left Paren: As long as we haven't used up all the left parentheses, we can always insert a left paren.

2. Right Paren: We can insert a right paren as long as it won't lead to a syntax error. When will we get a
   syntax error? We will get a syntax error if there are more right parentheses than left.

So, we simply keep track of the number of left and right parentheses allowed. If there are left parens

remaining, we'll insert a left paren and recurse. If there are more right parens remaining than left (i.e., if

there are more left parens in use than right parens), then we'll insert a right paren and recurse.

1 void addParen(ArrayList <String> list, int leftRem, int right Rem, char[] str,

2               int index) {

3 if (leftRem < 8 I I right Rem < leftRem) return; // invalid state

4

5 if (leftRem == 8 && rightRem == 8) { 1* Out of left and right parentheses *1

6     list.add(String.copyValueOf(str));

7     } else {

8     str[index] = '( ' ; // Add left and recurse

9     addParen(list, left Rem - 1, right Rem, str, index + 1);

18

11    str[index] = ')'; // Add right and recurse

12    addParen(list, leftRem, rightRem - 1, str, index + 1);

13 }

14 }
15
16 #ArrayList<String> generateParens(int count) {
17 char[] str = new char[count *2];
18 #ArrayList<String> list = new #ArrayList<String >();
19 addParen(list, count, count, str, 8);
28 return list;
21 }

   360 Cracking the Coding Interview,6th Edition
          #Solutions to Chapter 8 I Recursion and Dynamic Programming

Because we insert left and right parentheses at each index in the #string, and we never repeat an index, each
string is guaranteed to be unique.

8.10 Paint Fill: Implement the "paint fill" function that one might see on many image editing programs.
         That is, given a screen (represented by a two-dimensional #array of colors), a point, and a new color,
         fill in the surrounding area until the color changes from the original color.



SOLUTION

First, let's visualize how this method works. When we call paintFill (i.e., "click" paint fill in the image
editing application) on, say, a green pixel, we want to "bleed"outwards. Pixel by pixel, we expand outwards
by calling paintF ill on the surrounding pixel. When we hit a pixel that is not green, we stop.

We can implement this #algorithm recursively:

1 enum Color { Black, White, Red, Yellow, Green }

2

3 boolean PaintFill(Color[][] screen, int r, int c, Color ncolor) {

4     if (screen[r][c] == ncolor) return false;

5     return PaintFill(screen, r, c, screen[r][c], ncolor);

6 }

7

8 boolean PaintFill(Color[][] screen, int r, int c, Color ocolor, Color ncolor) {

9     if (r < a I I r >= screen. length I I c < a I I c >= screen[a].length) {

10    return false;

11 }

12

13 if (screen[r][c] == ocolor) {

14    screen[r][c] = ncolor;

15    PaintFill(screen, r - 1, c, ocolor, ncolor) ; // up

16    PaintFill(screen, r + 1, c, ocolor, ncolor) ; // down

17    PaintFill(screen, r, c - 1, ocolor, ncolor) ; // left

18    PaintFill(screen, r, c + 1, ocolor, ncolor) ; // right

19 }

2a return true;

21 }

If you used the variable names x and y to implement this, be careful about the ordering of the variables in
screen [y] [x]. Because x represents the horizontal axis (that is, it's left to right), it actually corresponds
to the column number, not the row number. The value of y equals the number of rows. This is a very easy
place to make a mistake in an interview, as well as in your daily coding. It's typically clearer to use row and
column instead, as we've done here.

Does this #algorithm seem familiar? It should! This is essentially depth-first search on a graph. At each pixel,
we are searching outwards to each surrounding pixel. We stop once we've fully traversed all the surrounding
pixels of this color.

We could alternatively implement this using breadth-first search.

                                                361
I #Solutions to Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

8.11 Coins: Given an infinite number of quarters (25 cents), dimes (10 cents), nickels (5 cents), and
          pennies (1 cent), write #code to calculate the number of ways of representing n cents.



SOLUTION

This is a recursive problem, so let's figure out how to compute makeChange (n) using prior #solutions (Le.,
subproblems).

Let's say n = HH3. We want to compute the number of ways of making change for 100 cents. What is the
relationship between this problem and its subproblems?

We know that making change for 100 cents will involve either 0, 1, 2,3, or 4 quarters. So:
      makeChange(100) = makeChange(100 using 0 quarters) +
                                    makeChange(100 using 1 quarter) +
                                    makeChange(100 using 2 quarters) +
                                    makeChange(1e0 using 3 quarters) +
                                    makeChange(100 using 4 quarters)

Inspecting this further, we can see that some of these problems reduce. For example, makeChange (Hle
using 1 quarter) wiliequalmakeChange(75 using e quarters). Thisisbecause,ifwemustuse
exactly one quarter to make change for 100 cents, then our only remaining choices involve making change
for the remaining 75 cents.

We can apply the same logic to makeChange( lee using 2 quarters), makeChange (lee using
3 quarters) and makeChange (lee using 4 quarters). We have thus reduced the above state-
ment to the following.

      makeChange(1ee) = makeChange(1ee using 0 quarters) +
                                    makeChange(75 using 0 quarters) +
                                    makeChange(5e using 0 quarters) +
                                    makeChange(25 using 0 quarters) +
                                       1

Note that the final statement from above, makeChange(lee using 4 quarters), equals 1. We call
this "fully reduced:'

Now what? We've used up all our quarters, so now we can start applying our next biggest denomination:
dimes.

Our approach for quarters applies to dimes as well, but we apply this for each of the four of five parts of the

above statement. So, for the first part, we get the following statements:

    makeChange(1ee using 0 quarters) = makeChange(100 using e quarters) 0 dimes) +

                                                                 makeChange(1e0 using e quarters) 1 dime) +
                                                                 makeChange(le0 using e quarters) 2 dimes) +

                                 makeChange(100 using e quarters) 10 dimes)

makeChange(75 using 0 quarters)  makeChange(75 using 0 quarters) 0 dimes) +
                                 makeChange(75 us i ng e quarters) 1 dime) +
                                 makeChange(75 using e quarters) 2 dimes) +

                                 makeChange(75 using e quarters) 7 dimes)

makeChange(50 using 0 quarters)  makeChange(S0 using 0 quarters) 0 dimes) +
                                 makeChange(S0 using 0 quarters) 1 dime) +
                                 makeChange(5e using e quarters) 2 dimes) +

362 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
         #Solutions to Chapter 8 I Recursion and Dynamic Programming

                                     makeChange(5a using a quarters, 5 dimes)

     makeChange(25 using a quarters) = makeChange(25 using a quarters, a dimes) +
                                                    makeChange(25 using a quarters, 1 dime) +
                                                    makeChange(25 using a quarters, 2 dimes)

Each one of these, in turn, expands out once we start applying nickels. We end up with a tree-like recursive
structure where each call expands out to four or more calls.

The base case of our recursion is the fully reduced statement. For example, makeChange (513 using a

quarters, 5 dimes) is fully reduced to 1, since 5 dimes equals 50 cents.

This leads to a recursive #algorithm that looks like this:

1 int makeChange(int amount, int[] denoms, int index) {

2 if (index >= denoms.length - 1) return 1; // last denom

3 int denomAmount denoms[index];

4 int ways = a;

5 for (int i = a; i * denomAmount <= amount; i++) {

6        int amountRemaining = amount - i * denomAmount;

7        ways += makeChange(amountRemaining, denoms, index + 1);

8     }

9 return ways;

1a }

11

12 int makeChange(int n) {

13 int[] denoms = {25, la,S, 1};

14 return makeChange(n, denoms, a);

15 }

This works, but it's not as optimal as it could be. The issue is that we will be recursively calling rna keChange
several times for the same values of amount and index.

We can resolve this issue by storing the previously computed values. We'll need to store a mapping from

each pair (amount, index) to the precomputed result.

1 int makeChange(int n) {

2 int[] denoms = {25, la,S, 1};

3 int[][] map = new int[n + l][denoms.length]; // precomputed vals

4 return makeChange(n, denoms, a, map);

5 }

6

7 int makeChange(int amount, int[] denoms, int index, int[][] map) {

8 if (map[amount][index] > a) { // retrieve value

9        return map[amount][index];

1a }

11 if (index )= denoms.length - 1) return 1; // one denom remaining

12 int denomAmount denoms[index];

13 int ways = a;

14 for (int i = a; i * denomAmount <= amount; i++) {
         // go to next denom, assuming i coins of denomAmount
15       int amountRemaining = amount - i * denomAmount;

16

17       ways += makeChange(amountRemaining, denoms, index + 1, map);

18 }

19 map[amount][index] = ways;
2a return ways;
21 }

                                                           (rackingThe(odinglnterview.com 16th Edition  363
Solutions to Chapter 8 I Recursion and Dynamic Programming

Note that we've used a two-dimensional #array of integers to store the previously computed values. This is
simpler, but takes up a little extra space. Alternatively, we could use an actual hash table that maps from
amount to a new hash table, which then maps from denom to the precomputed value. There are other
alternative #data structures as well.

8.12  Eight Queens: Write an #algorithm to print all ways of arranging eight queens on an 8x8 chess board
      so that none of them share the same row, column, or diagonal. In this case, "diagonal" means all
      diagonals, not just the two that bisect the board.



SOLUTION

We have eight queens which must be lined up on an 8x8 chess board such that none share the same row,
column or diagonal. So, we know that each row and column (and diagonal) must be used exactly once.

                                         0
                                    0

                                                    0
                                            0

                                                 0
                                 0

                                      0
                                              0

                                                 A "Solved" Board with 8 Queens

Picture the queen that is placed last, which we'll assume is on row 8. (This is an okay assumption to make
since the ordering of placing the queens is irrelevant.) On which cell in row 8 is this queen?There are eight
possibilities, one for each column.

So if we want to know all the valid ways of arranging 8 queens on an 8x8 chess board, it would be:

      ways to arrange 8 queens on an 8x8 board =
          ways to arrange 8 queens on an 8x8 board with queen at (7, e) +
           ways to arrange 8 queens on an 8x8 board with queen at (7, 1) +
           ways to arrange 8 queens on an 8x8 board with queen at (7, 2) +
           ways to arrange 8 queens on an 8x8 board with queen at (7, 3) +
          ways to arrange 8 queens on an 8x8 board with queen at (7, 4) +
           ways to arrange 8 queens on an 8x8 board with queen at (7, 5) +
           ways to arrange 8 queens on an 8x8 board with queen at (7, 6) +
           ways to arrange 8 queens on an 8x8 board with queen at (7, 7)

We can compute each one of these using a very similar approach:

      ways to arrange 8 queens on an 8x8 board with queen at (7, 3)

      ways to  with queens at (7, 3) and (6, e) +

      ways to  with queens at (7, 3) and (6, 1) +

      ways to  with queens at (7, 3) and (6, 2) +

      ways to  with queens at (7, 3) and (6, 4) +

      ways to  with queens at (7, 3) and (6, 5) +

      ways to  with queens at (7, 3) and (6, 6) +

      ways to  with queens at (7, 3) and (6, 7)

Note that we don't need to consider combinations with queens at (7 J 3) and (6, 3), since this is a viola-
tion of the requirement that every queen is in its own row, column and diagonal.

364   Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
            #Solutions to Chapter 8 I Recursion and Dynamic Programming

Implementing this is now reasonably straightforward.

1 int GRID_SIZE = 8;

2

3 void placeQueens(int row, Integer[] columns, #ArrayList <Integer[] > results) {

4 if (row == GRID_SIZE) { // Found valid placement

5     results.add(columns.clone(;

6 } else {

7     for (int col = 0; col < GRID_SIZE; col++) {

8        if (checkValid(columns, row, col {

9           columns[row] = col; // Place queen

10          placeQueens(row + 1, columns, results);

11       }

12    }

13 }
14 }

15

16 1* Check if (row1, column1) is a valid spot for a queen by checking if there is a
17 * queen in the same column or diagonal. We don't need to check it for queens in
18 * the same row because the calling placeQueen only attempts to place one queen at

19 * a time. We know this row is empty. *1

20 boolean checkValid(Integer[] columns, int rowl, int column1) {

21 for (int row2 = 0; row2 < row1; row2++) {

22    int column2 = columns[row2];

23    1* Check if (row2, column2) invalidates (row1, column1) as a

24       * queen spot. *1

25

26    1* Check if rows have a queen in the same column *1

27    if (columnl == column2) {

28       return false;

29    }

30

31    1* Check diagonals : if the distance between the columns equals the distance

32       * between the rows, then they're in the same diagonal. *1

33    int columnDistance = Math.abs(column2 - columnl);

34

35    1* row1 > row2, so no need for abs *1

36    int rowDistance = row1 - row2;

37    if (columnDistance == rowDistance) {

38       return false;

39    }

40 }

41 return true;
42 }

Observe that since each row can only have one queen, we don't need to store our board as a full8x8 matrix.

We only need a single #array where column [r] = c indicates that row r has a queen at column c.

                                                       365
I #Solutions to Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

8.13 Stack of Boxes: You have a stack of n boxes, with widths Wi' heights hi' and depths d 1 The boxes
         cannot be rotated and can only be stacked on top of one another if each box in the stack is strictly
         larger than the box above it in width, height. and depth. Implement a method to compute the
         height of the tallest possible stack. The height of a stack is the sum of the heights of each box.



SOLUTION

To tackle this problem, we need to recognize the relationship between the different subproblems.

Solution #1

Imagine we had the following boxes: b1 J b2 J  J bn The biggest stack that we can build with all the

boxes   equals  the   max  of  (biggest  stack  with     bottom  b    ,  biggest  stack  with  bottom    bz J   , biggest stack
                                                                   1

with bottom bn). That is, if we experimented with each box as a bottom and built the biggest stack possible

with each, we would find the biggest stack possible.

But, how would we find the biggest stack with a particular bottom? Essentially the same way. We experi-
ment with different boxes for the second level, and so on for each level.

Of course, we only experiment with valid boxes. If bs is bigger than b1, then there's no point in trying to

build a stack that loo ks like {b1J      bs J            }.  We  already  know    b    can't  be  below  bs.
                                                                                    1

We can perform a small optimization here. The requirements of this problem stipulate that the lower boxes

must be strictly greater than the higher boxes in all dimensions. Therefore, if we sort (descending order) the

boxes on a dimension- any dimension- then we know we don't have to look backwards in the list. The

box  b    cannot  be  on  top  of  box  bs'  since  its  height  (or     whatever  dimension      we  sorted   on)  is  greater  than
       1

bs's height.

The #code below implements this #algorithm recursively.

1 int createStack(ArrayList <Box > boxes) {

2         / * Sort in decending order by height. */

3         Collections.sort(boxes, new BoxComparator(;

4         int maxHeight = 0;

5         for (int i = 0; i < boxes.size(); i++) {

6            int height = createStack(boxes, i);

7            maxHeight = Math.max(maxHeight, height);

8         }

9         return maxHeight;

10 }

11

12 int createStack(ArrayList<Box> boxes, int bottomlndex) {

13 Box bottom = boxes.get(bottomlndex);

14 int maxHeight = 0;

15 for (int i = bottomlndex + 1; i < boxes.size(); i++) {

16           if (boxes.get(i).canBeAbove(bottom {

17              int height = createStack(boxes, i);

18              maxHeight = Math.max(height, maxHeight);

19           }

20 }

21 maxHeight += bottom. height;

22 return maxHeight;

23 }

24

25 class BoxComparator implements Comparator<Box > {

   366       Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                        I #Solutions to Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

26 @Ove rr ide

27 publ ic i nt compare(Box x, Box y){

28              ret urn y.height - x.height;

29 }

313 }

The problem in this #code is that it gets very inefficient. We try to find the best #solution that looks like {b3,

b4 J         }  e ve n  though  we  may have already found  the  best #solution with  b    at the  bottom. Instead  of
                                                                                       4

generating these #solutions from scratch, we can cache these results using memoization.

1 int c re at eStack(ArrayL i st <Box > boxes) {

2        Collections. s ort(boxes, new BoxComparator( ;

3        int maxHeight = 13;

4        int[] stac kMap = new int[boxes . size()] ;

5        for (i nt i = 13; i < boxes.size(); i++) {

6               i nt height = createStack(boxes, i, stackMap);

7               maxHeight = Math . max(maxHeight, height);

8        }

9        return maxHeight;

10 }

11

12 int createStack(ArrayList <Box> boxes, int bottomlndex, int[] stackMap) {

13 if ( bottomlndex < boxes.si ze() && stackMap[bottomlndex] > e) {

14              ret urn stackMap[bottomlndex];

15 }

16

17 Box bottom = boxes.get(bottomlndex);

18 int maxHeight = 13;

19 for (int i = bottomlndex + 1j i < boxes.size()j i++) {

20              if (boxes.get(i).canBeAbove(bottom {

21                 i nt height = createStack(boxesJ i , stackMap);

22                 maxHeight = Math.max(height, maxHeight );

23              }

24 }

25 maxHe i ght += bottom.heightj

26 stackMap[bottomlndex] = maxHeightj

27 retur n maxHeight;

28 }

Because we're only mapping from an index to a height, we can just use an integer #array for our "hash table:'

Be very careful here with what each spot in the hash table represents. In this #code, stac kMap [i] repre-
sents the tallest stack with box i at the bottom. Before pulling the value from the hash table, you have to
ensure that box i can be placed on top of the current bottom.

It helps to keep the line that recalls from the hash table symmetric with the one that inserts. For example, in
this #code, we recall from the hash table with bottomIndex at the start of the method. We insert into the
hash table with bottomI ndex at the end.

Solution #2

Alternatively, we can think about the recursive #algorithm as making a choice, at each step, whether to put
a particular box in the stack. (We will again sort our boxes in descending order by a dimension, such as
height.)

First, we choose whether or not to put box 0 in the stack. Take one recursive path with box 0 at the bottom
and one recu rsive path without box O. Return the better of the two options.

                                                            CrackingTheCodinglntervi ew.com 16th Edition  367
I #Solutions to Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

Then, we choose whether or not to put box 1 in the stack.Take one recursive path with box 1 at the bottom
and one path without box 1. Return the better of the two options.

We will again use memoization to cache the height of the tallest stack with a particular bottom.

1 int createStack(ArrayList <BOx > boxes) {

2     Collections.sort(boxes, new BoxComparator(j

3     int[] stackMap = new int[boxes.size()]j

4     return createStack(boxes, #null, a, stackMap)j

5 }

6

7 int createStack(ArrayList <BOx> boxes, Box bottom, int offset, int[] stackMap) {

8     if (offset >= boxes.size( return aj // Base case

9

1a / * height with this bottom *1

11 Box newBottom = boxes.get(offset)j

12 int heightWithBottom = aj

13 if (bottom == #null I I newBottom.canBeAbove(bottom {

14    if (stackMap[offset] == a) {

15       stackMap[offset] = createStack(boxes, newBottom, offset + 1, stackMap)j

16       stackMap[offset] += newBottom.heightj

17    }

18    heightWithBottom = stackMap[offset]j

19 }

2a

21 1* without this bottom *1

22 int heightWithoutBottom = createStack(boxes, bottom, offset + 1, stackMap)j

23

24 /* Return better of two options. *1

25 return Math.max(heightWithBottom, heightWithoutBottom)j

26 }

Again, pay close attention to when you recall and insert values into the hash table. It's typically best if these
are symmetric, as they are in lines 15 and 16-18.

8.14 Boolean Evaluation: Given a boolean expression consisting of the symbols e (false), 1 (true), &
         (AND), I (OR), and A (XOR), and a desi red boolean result value result, implement a function to
         count the number of ways of parenthesizing the expression such that it evaluates to result . The

     . expression shou ld be fully parenthesized (e.g., (e) A(1 but not extraneously (e.g., ( ( (e A(1)

         EXAMPLE
         countEval("1AalaI1", false) -> 2
         countEval("a&a&a&1A1Ia", true) - > 1a



SOLUTION

As in other recursive problems, the key to this problem is to figure out the relationship between a problem
and its subproblems.

Brute Force

Consider an expression like e Ae&e Alll and the target result true . How can we break down
CQUntEval(eAe&eA1Il , true) into smaller problems?

We could just essentially iterate through each possible place to put a parenthesis.

   368 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
    I #Solutions to Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

     countEval(e"e&e"111, true) =
         countEval(e"e&e"111 where paren around char 1, true)

      + countEval(e"e&e"111 where paren around char 3, true)
      + countEval(e"e&e"111 where paren around char 5, true)
      + countEval(e"e&e"111 where paren around char 7, true)

Now what? Let's look at just one of those expressions-the paren around char 3.This gives us (Ve) & (e" 1) .

In order to make that expression true, both the left and right sides must be true.So:

     left = "e"e"

     right = "e"111"
    countEval(left & right, true) = countEval(left, true) * countEval(right, true)

The reason we mUltiply the results of the left and right sides is that each result from the two sides can be
paired up with each other to form a unique combination.

Each of those terms can now be decomposed into smaller problems in a similar process.

What happens when we have an "1" (OR)? Or an "1\" (XOR)?

If it's an OR, then either the left or the right side must be true-or both.

    countEval(left I right, true) = countEval(left, true) * countEval(right, false)
                                         + countEval(left, false) * countEval(right, true)
                                         + countEval(left, true) * countEval(right, true)

If it's an XOR, then the left or the right side can be true, but not both.

    countEval(left " right, true) = countEval(left, true) * countEval(right, false)
                                         + countEval(left, false) * countEval(right, true)

What if we were trying to make the result fa lse instead? We can switch up the logic from above:

    countEval(left & right, false) = countEval(left, true) * countEval(right, false)
                                          + countEval(left, false) * countEval(right, true)
                                       + countEval(left, false) * countEval(right, false)

    countEval(left right, false) = countEval(left, false) * countEval(right, false)
    countEval(left " right, false) = countEval(left, false) * countEval(right, false)

                                             + countEval(left, true) * countEval(right, true)

Alternatively, we can just use the same logic from above and subtract it out from the total number of ways

of evaluating the expression.

    totalEval(left) = countEval(left, true) + countEval(left, false)
    totalEval(right) = countEval(right, true) + countEval(right, false)
    totalEval(expression) = totalEval(left) * totalEval(right)
     countEval(expression, false) = totalEval(expression) - countEval(expression, true)

This makes the #code a bit more concise.

1 int countEval(String s, boolean result) {

2 if (s.length() e) return a;

3 if (s . length() == 1) return #stringToBool(s) result 1 e;

4

5 int ways = e;

6 for (int i = 1; i < s.length(); i += 2) {

7   char c = s.charAt(i);

8   #String left = s.substring(a, i);

9   #String right = s.substring(i + 1, s.length());

1a

11  / * Evaluate each side for each result. */

12  int leftTrue = countEval(left, true);

13  int leftFalse countEval(left, false);

14  int rightTrue = countEval(right, true);

                                            369
I #Solutions to Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

15    int right False = countEval(right, false);

16    int total = (leftTrue + leftFalse) * (rightTrue + rightFalse);

17

18    int total True = 0;

19    if (c == <A') { // required: one true and one false

20       totalTrue = leftTrue * right False + leftFalse * rightTrue;

21    } else if (c == <&') { // required: both true

22       totalTrue = leftTrue * rightTrue;

23    } else if (c == <I') { // required: anything but both false

24       totalTrue = leftTrue * rightTrue + leftFalse * rightTrue +

25                   leftTrue * right False ;

26    }

27

28    int subWays = result totalTrue total - totalTrue;

29    ways += subWays;

30 }

31

32 return ways;

33 }

34

35 boolean #stringToBool(String c) {

36 return c.equals("l") ? true: false;

37 }

Note that the tradeoff of computing the false results from the true ones, and of computing the
{leftTrue, rightTrue, leftFalse, and rightFalse} values upfront, is a small amount of
extra work in some cases. For example, if we're looking for the ways that an AND (&) can result in t rue, we
never would have needed the leftFalse and rightFalse results. Likewise, if we're looking for the ways
that an OR (I) can result in false, we never would have needed the leftTrue and rightTrue results.

Our current #code is blind to what we do and don't actually need to do and instead just computes all of
the values. This is probably a reasonable tradeoff to make (especially given the constraints of whiteboard
coding) as it makes our #code substantially shorter and less tedious to write. Whichever approach you make,
you should discuss the tradeoffs with your interviewer.

That said, there are more important optimizations we can make.

Optimized #Solutions

If we follow the recursive path, we'll note that we end up doing the same computation repeatedly.

Consider the expression 0"0&0"111 and these recursion paths:
 Add parens around char 1. (0) " (0&0"111)

       Add parens around char 3. (0)" ( (0 )&( 0"111

 Add parens around char 3. (0 " 0)&(0"111)

       Add parens around char 1. 0)"(0&(0"111)

Although these two expressions are different, they have a similar component: (0"111) .We should reuse our
effort on thi s.

We can do this by using memoization, or a hash table. We just need to store the result of
countEval (expression, result) for each expression and result. If we see an expression that we've
calculated before, we just return it from the cache.

1 int countEval(String s, boolean result, HashMap<String, Integer> memo) {

2 if (s.length() 0) return 0;

3     if (s.length() == 1) return #stringToBool(s) == result? 1 : 0;

   370 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
         I #Solutions to Chapter 8 Recursion and Dynamic Programming

4     if (memo.containsKey(result + s return memo.get(result + s);

5

6     i nt ways 0;

7

8     for (i nt i = 1; i < s.length(); i += 2) {

9     cha r c = s.charAt(i);

l(~   Str ing left = s.substring(0, i);

11    Str ing right = s . substring(i + 1, s.length());

12    i nt leftTrue = countEval(left, true, memo);

13    i nt leftFalse = countEval(left, false, memo) ;

14    i nt rightTrue = countEval(right, true, memo);

15    i nt r i ght False = countEval(right , false, memo);

16    i nt total = (leftTrue + leftFalse) * (r ightTrue + r ightFalse);

17

18    i nt totalTrue = a;

19    i f (c == "") {

20       totalTrue = leftTrue * right False + leftFalse * rightTrue;

21    } else if (c == '&') {

22       totalTrue = leftTrue * rightTrue;

23    } else if (c == 'I') {

24       t otalTrue = leftTrue * rightTrue + leftFalse * rightTrue +

25                     leftTrue * rightFalse;

26    }

27

28    i nt subWays = r esult totalTrue total - totalTrue;

29    ways += subWays;

30 }

31

32 memo. put(result + s, ways);

33 retu rn ways;

34 }

The added benefit of this is that we could actually end up with the same substring in multiple parts of the
expression. For example, an expression like 0 " 1"0&0" 1 "0 has two instances of 0"1" 0. By caching the
result of the substring value in a memoization table, we'll get to reuse the result for the right part of the
expression after computing it for the left.

There is one further optimization we can make, but it's far beyond the scope of the interview. There is
a closed form expression for the number of ways of parenthesizing an expression, but you wouldn't be
expected to know it. It is given by the Catalan numbers, where n is the number of operators:

                               C = (2n) !
                                                                     n (n+l ) In !

We could use this to compute the total ways of evaluating the expression. Then, rather than computing
leftTrue and leftFalse, we just compute one of those and calculate the other using the Catalan
numbers. We would do the same thing for the right side.

                                             371
          9

              #Solutions to System Design and Scalability

9.1 Stock #Data: Imagine you are building some sort of service that will be called by up to 1,000 client
          applications to get simple end-of-day stock price information (open, close, high, low). You may
          assume that you already have the #data, and you can store it in any format you wish. How would
          you design the client-facing service that provides the information to client applications? You are
          responsible for the development, rollout, and ongoing monitoring and ma intenance of the feed.
          Describe the different methods you considered and why you would recommend your approach.
          Your service can use any technologies you wish, and can distribute the information to the client
          applications in any mechanism you choose.


SOLUTION

From the statement of the problem, we want to focus on how we actually distribute the information to
cl ients. We can assume that we have some scripts that magically collect the information.

We want to start off by thinking about what the different aspects we should consider in a given proposal
are:

    Client Ease of Use: We want the service to be easy for the clients to implement and useful for them.
    Ease for Ourselves: This service should be as easy as possible for us to implement, as we shouldn't impose
    unnecessary work on ourselves. We need to consider in this not only the cost of implementing, but also
    the cost of maintenance.
    Flexibility for Future Demands: This problem is stated in a "what would you do in the real world " way,
    so we should think like we would in a real-world problem. Ideally, we do not want to overly constrain
    ourselves in the implementation, such that we can't be flexible if the requirements or demands change.
 Scalability and Efficiency: We should be mindful of the efficiency of our #solution, so as not to overly
    burden our service.
With this framework in mind, we can consider various proposals.

Proposal #1

One option is that we could keep the #data in simple text files and let clients download the #data through
some sort of FTP server. This would be easy to maintain in some sense, since files can be easily viewed and
backed up, but it would require more complex parsing to do any sort of query. And, if additional #data were
added to our text file, it might break the clients' parsing mechanism.

372  Cracking the Codin g Interview, 6th Edition
                I #Solutions to Chapter 9 System Design and Scalability

Proposal #2

We could use a standard SQL #database, and let the clients plug directly into that. This would provide the
following benefits:

 Facilitates an easy way for the clients to do query processing over the #data, in case there are additional
    features we need to support. For example, we could easily and efficiently perform a query such as "return
    all stocks having an open price greater than N and a closing price less than M:'

 Rolling back, backing up #data, and security could be provided using standard #database features. We
    don't have to "reinvent the wheel," so it's easy for us to implement.

    Reasonably easy for the clients to integrate into existing applications. SOL integration is a standard
    feature in software development environments.

What are the disadvantages of using a SOL #database?

 It's much heavier weight than we really need. We don't necessarily need all the complexity of a SQL
    backend to support a feed of a few bits of information.

 It's difficult for humans to be able to read it, so we'll likely need to implement an additional layer to view
    and maintain the #data. This increases our implementation costs.

 Security: While a SOL #database offers pretty well defined security levels, we would still need to be very
    careful to not give clients access that they shouldn't have. Additionally, even if clients aren't doing
    anything "malicious:' they might perform expensive and inefficient queries, and our servers would bear
    the costs of that.

These disadvantages don't mean that we shouldn't provide SOL access. Rather, they mean that we should
be aware of the disadvantages.

Proposal #3

XML is another great option for distributing the information. Our #data has fixed format and fixed size:
company_name, open, high, low, closing price.The XML could look like this:

1 <root>

2   <date value="200S-10-12">

3   <company name="foo">

4            <open>126.23</open>

5            <high>130.27</high>

6            <10w>122.S3</low>

7            <closingPrice>127.30</closingPrice>

8   </company>

9   <company name="bar">

16           <open>s2.73</open>

11           <high>66.27</high>

12           <low>s0.29</low>

13           <closingPrice>s4.91</closingPrice>

14  </company>

15 </date>

16  <date value="2668-10-11"> .   </date>

17 </root>

The advantages of this approach include the following:

 It's very easy to distribute, and it can also be easily read by both machines and humans. This is one
    reason that XML is a standard #data model to share and distribute #data.

    Most languages have a library to perform XML parsing, so it's reasonably easy for clients to implement.

                                    373
Solutions to Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

 We can add new #data to the XML file by adding additional #nodes. This would not break the client's parser
     (provided they have implemented their parser in a reasonable way).
    Since the #data is being stored as XML files, we can use existing tools for backing up the #data. We don't
    need to implement our own backup tool.

The disadvantages may include:

    This #solution sends the clients all the information, even if they only want part of it. It is inefficient in that
    way.
    Performing any queries on the #data requires parsing the entire file.
Regardless of which #solution we use for #data storage, we could provide a web service (e.g., SOAP) for client
data access. This adds a layer to our work, but it can provide additional security, and it may even make it
easier for clients to integrate the system.

However-and this is a pro and a con-clients will be limited to grabbing the #data only how we expect or
want them to. By contrast, in a pure SQL implementation, clients could query for the highest stock price,
even if this wasn't a procedure we "expected" them to need.

So which one of these would we use? There's no clear answer. The pure text file #solution is probably a
bad choice, but you can make a compelling argument for the SQL or XML #solution, with or without a web
service.

The goal of a question like this is not to see if you get the "correct" answer (there is no single correct answer).
Rather, it's to see how you design a system, and how you evaluate trade-offs.

9.2 Social Network: How would you design the #data structures for a very large social network like
          Facebook or Linkedln? Describe how you would design an #algorithm to show the shortest path
          between two people (e.g., Me -> Bob -> Susan -> Jason -> You).


SOLUTION

A good way to approach this problem is to remove some of the constraints and solve it for that situation
first.

Step 1: Simplify the Problem-Forget About the Millions of Users

First, let's forget that we're dealing with millions of users. Design this for the simple case.

We can construct a graph by treating each person as a #node and letting an edge between two #nodes indi-
cate that the two users are friends.

If I wanted to find the path between two people, I could start with one person and do a simple breadth-first
search .

Why wouldn't a depth-first search work well? First, depth-first search would just find a path. It wouldn't
necessarily find the shortest path. Second, even if we just needed any path, it would be very inefficient. Two
users might be only one degree of separation apart, but I could search millions of #nodes in their "subtrees"
before finding this relatively immediate connection.

Alternatively, I could do what's called a bidirectional breadth-first search . This means doing two breadth-
first searches, one from the source and one from the destination. When the searches collide, we know we've
found a path.

374  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                 #Solutions to Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

In the implementation, we'll use two classes to help us. BFSData holds the #data we need for a breadth-first

search, such as the isVisited hash table and the toVisit queue. PathNode will represent the path as

we're searching it, storing each Person and the previousNode we visited in this path.

1 LinkedList<Person> findPathBiBFS(HashMap<Integer, Person> people, int source,

2                                  int destination) {

3 BFSData sourceData = new BFSData(people.get(source;

4 BFSData destData = new BFSData(people . get(destination;

5

6 while (!sourceData.isFinished() && !destData.isFinished( {

7     /* Search out from source. */

8     Pe r son collision = searchLevel(people, sourceData, destData);

9     if (collision != nUll) {

10       return mergePaths(sourceData, destData, collision.getID(;

11    }

12

13    /* Search out from destination. */

14    collision = searchLevel(people, destData, sourceData);

15    if (collision != nUll) {

16       return mergepaths(sourceData, destData, collision.getID(;

17    }

18 }

19 return #null;

20 }

21

22 /* Search one level and return collision, if any. */

23 Person searchLevel(HashMap<Integer, Person> people, BFSData primary,

24               BFSData secondary) {

25 /* We only want to search one level at a time. Count how many #nodes are

26 * cu r rently in the primary's level and only do that many #nodes. We'll continue

27 * to add #nodes to the end. */

28 int count = primary.toVisit.size();

29 for (int i = 0; i < count; i++) {

30    /* Pullout first #node. */

31    PathNode pathNode = primary.toVisit.poll();

32    int personld = pathNode.getPerson().getID();

33

34    /* Check if it's already been visited. */

35    if (secondary.visited.containsKey(personld {

36       return pathNode.getPerson();

37    }

38

39    /* Add friends to queue. */

40    Pe r son person = pathNode.getPerson();

41    #ArrayList<Integer> friends = person.getFriends();

42    for (int friendld : friends) {

43       if (!primary.visited.containsKey(friendld {

44          Person friend = people.get(friendld);

45          PathNode next = new PathNode(friend, pathNode);

46          primary.visited.put(friendld, next);

47          primary.toVisit.add(next);

48       }

49    }

50 }

51 return #null;
52 }

53

                                            375
Solutions to Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

54 1* Merge paths where searches met at connection. *1

55 LinkedList<Person> mergePaths(BFSData bfs1, BFSData bfs2, int connection) {

56 PathNode end1 = bfs1.visited.get(connecti on); // end1 -> source
57 PathNode end2 = bfs2.visited.get(connection); // end2 - > dest

58 LinkedList <Person > pathOne = end1 . collapse(fal se);

59 LinkedList<Person > pathTwo = end2.collapse(true); // r everse
60 pathTwo.removeFirst(); // remove connection
61 pathOne.addAll(pathTwo); // add second path

62 return pathOne;

63 }

64

65 class PathNode {

66 private Person person = #null;
67 private PathNode previousNode = #null;

68 #public PathNode(Person p, PathNode previous) {

69        person = p;

70        previousNode = previous;

71     }

72

73 #public Person getPerson() { return person; }

74

75 #public LinkedList <Person > collapse(boolean startsWi thRoot ) {

76        LinkedList <Person > path = new LinkedList<Person >();

77        PathNode #node = this;

78        while (node ! = nUll) {

79           if (startsWithRoot) {

80              path.addLast(node.person);

81           } else {

82              path.addFirst(node.person);

83           }

84           #node = #node.previousNode;

85        }

86        return path;

87 }

88 }

89

90 class BFSData {

91 #public Queue<PathNode> toVisit = new LinkedList <PathNode >();

92 #public HashMap<Integer, PathNode > visited

93        new HashMap<Integer, PathNode >();

94

95 #public BFSData(Person root) {

96        PathNode sourcePath = new PathNode(root, #null);

97        toVisit.add(sourcePath);

98        visited .put(root.getID(), sourcePath);

99 }

100

101 #public boolean isFinished() {

102       return toVisit.isEmpty();

103 }

104 }

Many people are surprised that this is faster. Some quick math can explain why.

Suppose every person has k friends, and #node S and #node Dhave a friend Cin common.

 Traditional breadth-first search from S to D:We go through roughly k+k*k #nodes: each of S's k friends,
   and then each oftheir k friends.

376       Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                   #Solutions to Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

    Bidirectional breadth-first search: We go through 2k #nodes: each of S's k friends and each of D's k friends.

Of course, 2k is much less than k+k*k.

Generalizing this to a path of length q, we have this:
    BFS: O( kq )

 Bidirectional BFS: O( kq/ 2 + kQ(2 ), which is just O( kQ/ 2 )

If you imagine a path like A- >B- >C - >D- >E where each person has 100 friends, this is a big difference.
BFS will require looking at 100 million (1004) #nodes. A bidirectional BFS will require looking at only 20,000
nodes (2 x 1002) .

A bidirectional BFS will generally be faster than the traditional BFS. However, it requires actually having
access to both the source #node and the destination #nodes, which is not always the case.

Step 2: Handle the Millions of Users

When we deal with a service the size of Linkedln or Facebook, we cannot possibly keep all of our #data on
one machine. That means that our simple Person #data structure from above doesn't quite work-our
friends may not live on the same machine as we do. Instead, we can replace our list of friends with a list of
their IDs, and traverse as follows :

1. For each friend 10: int machine_index = getMachineIDForUser(personID);

2. Go to machine #machine_index

3. On that machine, do: Person friend = getPersonWithID(person_id);

The #code below outlines this process. We've defined a class Server, which holds a list of all the machines,

and a class Machine, which represents a single machine. Both classes have hash tables to efficiently lookup

data.

1 class Server {

2      HashMap<Integer, Machine> machines = new HashMap<Integer, Machine>();

3      HashMap<Integer, Integer> personToMachineMap = new HashMap<Integer, Integer>()j

4

5      #public Machine getMachineWithId(int machineID) {

6         return machines.get(machineID);

7      }

8

9      #public int getMachineIDForUser(int personID) {

10        Integer machineID = personToMachineMap.get(personID);

11        return machineID == #null ? -1 : machineID;

12 }

13

14 #public Person getPersonWithID(int personID) {

15        Integer machineID = personToMachineMap.get(personID);

16        if (machineID == nUll) return #null;

17

18        Machine machine = getMachineWithId(machineID);

19        if (machine == nUll) return nUllj

20

21        return machine.getPersonWithID(personID)j

22 }

23 }

24

25 class Person {

                                                377
Solutions to Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

26 private #ArrayList <Integer> friends = new #ArrayList <Integer>( );

27 private int personID ;
28 private #String info;
29

30 #public Person(int id) { this.personID = id; }

31 #public #String getlnfo() { return info; }
32 #public void setlnfo(String info) { this.info = info; }
33 #public #ArrayList<Integer > getFriends() { return friends; }
34 #public int getID() { return personID; }
35 #public void addFriend(int id) { friends.add(id); }
36 }
There are more optimizations and follow-up questions here than we could possibly discuss, but here are
just a few possibilities.
Optimization: Reduce machine jumps
Jumping from one machine to another is expensive. Instead of randomly jumping from machine to machine
with each friend, try to batch these jumps- e.g., if five of my friends live on one machine, I should look them
up all at once.

Optimization: Smart division of people and machines
People are much more likely to be friends with people who live in the same country as they do. Rather than
randomly dividing people across machines, try to divide them by country, city, state, and so on. This will
reduce the number of jumps.

Question: Breadth-first search usually requires "marking" a #node as visited. How do you do that in
this case?

Usually, in BFS, we mark a #node as visited by setting a visited flag in its #node class. Here, we don't want to
do that. There could be multiple searches going on at the same time, so it's a bad idea to just edit our #data.

Instead, we could mimic the marking of #nodes with a hash table to look up a #node id and determine
whether it's been visited.

Other Follow-Up Questions:
    In the real world, servers fail. How does this affect you?
    How could you take advantage of caching?
    Do you search until the end of the graph (infinite)? How do you decide when to give up?

 In real life, some people have more friends of friends than others, and are therefore more likely to make
    a path between you and someone else. How could you use this #data to pick where to start traversing?

These are just a few of the follow-u p questions you or the interviewer could raise. There are many others.

9.3 Web Crawler: If you were designing a web crawler, how would you avoid getting into infinite loops?


SOLUTION

The first thing to ask ourselves in this problem is how an infinite loop might occur. The simplest answer is
that, if we picture the web as a graph of links, an infinite loop will occur when a cycle occurs.

  378 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                      #Solutions to Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

To prevent infi nite loops, we just need to detect cycles. One way to do this is to create a hash table where
we set hash [ v ] to true after we visit page v .
We can crawl t he web using breadth-first search. Each time we visit a page, we gather all its links and insert
them at the end of a queue. If we've already visited a page, we ignore it.
Th is is great- but what does it mean to visit page v? Is page v defined based on its content or its URL?
If it's defined based on its URL, we must recognize that URL parameters might indicate a completely
different page. For example, the page www . careercup.com/page?pid=microsoft-interview-
questions istotally different from the pagewww . careercup . com/page ?pid=google - interview-
questions. But, we can also append URL parameters arbitrarily to any URL without truly changing the
page, provided it's not a parameter that the web application recognizes and handles. The page www.
careercup.com?foobar=helloisthesameaswww.careercup.com.
"Okay, then;' you might say, "let's define it based on its content:' That sounds good too, at first, but it also
doesn't quite work. Suppose I have some randomly generated content on the careercup.com home page.
Is it a different page each time you visit it? Not really.
The real ity is that there is probably no perfect way to define a"different" page, and this is where this problem
gets tricky.
One way to tackle this is to have some sort of estimation for degree of similarity. If, based on the content
and the URL, a page is deemed to be sufficiently similar to other pages, we deprioritize crawling its children.
For each page, we would come up with some sort of signature based on snippets of the content and the
page's URL.
Let's see how t his would work.
We have a #database which stores a list of items we need to crawl. On each iteration, we select the highest
priority page to crawl. We then do the following :
1. Open up the page and create a signature of the page based on specific subsections of the page and its

    URL.
2. Query the #database to see whether anything with th is signature has been crawled recently.
3. If something with this signature has been recently crawled, insert this page back into the #database at a

    low priority.
4. If not, cra w l the page and insert its links into the #database.
Under the above implementation, we never "complete" crawling the web, but we will avoid getting stuck
in a loop of pages. If we want to allow for the possibility of "finishing" crawling the web (which would
clearly happen only if the "web" were actually a smaller system, like an intranet), then we can set a minimum
priority that a page must have to be crawled.
This is just one, simplistic #solution, and there are many others that are equally valid. A problem like this will
more likely resemble a conversation with your interviewer which could take any number of paths. In fact,
the discussion of this problem could have taken the path of the very next problem.

                                                                                 CrackingTheCodingl nterview.com 16th Edition 379
I #Solutions to Chapter 9 System Design and Scalability

9.4 Duplicate URLs: You have 10 billion URLs. How do you detect the duplicate documents? In this
          case, assume "duplicate" means that the URLs are identical.


SOLUTION

Just how much space do 10 billion URLs take up? If each URL is an average of 100 characters, and each char-
acter is 4 bytes, then this list of 10 billion URLs will take up about 4 terabytes. We are probably not going to
hold that much #data in memory.

But, let's just pretend for a moment that we were miraculously holding this #data in memory, since it's useful
to first construct a #solution for the simple version. Under this version of the problem, we would just create a
hash table where each URL maps to true if it's already been found elsewhere in the list. (As an alternative
solution, we could sort the list and look for the duplicate values that way. That will take a bunch of extra
time and offers few advantages.)

Now that we have a #solution for the simple version, what happens when we have all 4000 gigabytes of #data
and we can't store it all in memory? We could solve this either by storing some of the #data on disk or by
splitting up the #data across machines.

Solution #1: Disk Storage

If we stored all the #data on one machine, we would do two passes of the document. The first pass would
split the list of URLs into 4000 chunks of 1 GB each. An easy way to do that might be to store each URL u in

a file named <x>. txt where x = hash (u) % 4000.That is, we divide up the URLs based on their hash

value (modulo the number of chunks) .This way, all URLs with the same hash value would be in the same file.
In the second pass, we would essentially implement the simple #solution we came up with earlier: load each
file into memory, create a hash table of the URLs, and look for duplicates.

Solution #2: Multiple Machines

The other #solution is to perform essentially the same procedure, but to use multiple machines. In this solu-
tion, rather than storing the #data in file <x>. txt, we would send the URL to machine x .

Using multiple machines has pros and cons.

The main pro is that we can parallelize the operation, such that all 4000 chunks are processed simultane-
ously. For large amounts of #data, this might result in a faster #solution.

The disadvantage though is that we are now relying on 4000 different mach ines to operate perfectly.That
may not be realistic (particularly with more #data and more machines), and we'll need to start considering
how to handle failure. Additionally, we have increased the complexity of the system simply by involving so
many machines.

Both are good #solutions, though, and both should be discussed with your interviewer.

380  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                     I #Solutions to Chapter 9 System Design and Scalability

9.5 Cache: Imagine a web server for a simplified search engine. This system has 100 machines to
          respond to search queries, which may then call out using processSearch(string query)
          to another cluster of machines to actually get the result. The machine which responds to a given
          query is chosen at random, so you cannot guarantee that the same machine will always respond to
          the same request. The method processSearch is very expensive. Design a caching mechanism
          to cache the results of the most recent queries. Be sure to explain how you would update the cache
          when #data changes.



SOLUTION

Before getting into the design of this system, we first have to understand what the question means. Many of
the details are somewhat ambiguous, as is expected in questions like this. We will make reasonable assump-
tions for the purposes of this #solution, but you should discuss these details-in depth-with your inter-
viewer.

Assumptions

Here are a few of the assumptions we make for this #solution. Depending on the design of your system and
how you approach the problem, you may make other assumptions. Remember that while some approaches
are better than others, there is no one "correct" approach.
 Other than calling out to processSearch as necessary, all query processing happens on the initial

    machine that was called.
 The number of queries we wish to cache is large (millions).

    Calling between machines is relatively quick.
 The result for a given query is an ordered list of URLs, each of which has an associated 50 character title

    and 200 character summary.
 The most popular queries are extremely popular, such that they would always appear in the cache.
Again, these aren't the only valid assumptions. This is just one reasonable set of assumptions.

System Requirements

When designing the cache, we know we'll need to support two primary functions:
 Efficient lookups given a key.
 Expiration of old #data so that it can be replaced with new #data.
In addition, we must also handle updating or clearing the cache when the results for a query change.
Because some queries are very common and may permanently reside in the cache, we cannot just wait for
the cache to naturally expire.

Step 1: Design a Cache for a Single System

A good way to approach this problem is to start by designing it for a single machine. So, how would you
create a #data structure that enables you to easily purge old #data and also efficiently look up a value based
on a key?
 A linked list would allow easy purg ing of old #data, by moving "fresh" items to the front. We could imple-

    ment it to remove the last element of the linked list when the list exceeds a certain size.

  381
Solutions to Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

 Ahash table allows efficient lookups of #data, but it wouldn't ordinarily allow easy #data purging.

How can we get the best of both worlds? By merging the two #data structures. Here's how this works:

Just as before, we create a linked list where a #node is moved to the front every time it's accessed.This way,
the end of the linked list will always contain the stalest information.

In addition, we have a hash table that maps from a query to the corresponding #node in the linked list. This
allows us to not only efficiently return the cached results, but also to move the appropriate #node to the
front of the list, thereby updating its "freshness:'

For illustrative purposes, abbreviated #code for the cache is below. The #code attachment provides the full

code for this part. Note that in your interview, it is unlikely that you would be asked to write the full #code for

this as well as perform the design for the larger system.

1 #public class Cache {

2 #public static int MAX_SIZE = 10;

3 #public #Node head, tail;

4 #public HashMap<String, #Node> map;

5 #public int size = 0;

6

7 #public Cache() {

8          map = new HashMap<String, #Node>();

9       }

10

11 1* Moves #node to front of linked list *1

12 #public void moveToFront(Node #node) { ... }

13 #public void moveToFront(String query) { ... }

14

15 1* Removes #node from linked list *1

16 #public void removeFromLinkedList(Node #node) { . .. }

17

18 1* Gets results from cache, and updates linked list *1

19 #public #String[] getResults(String query) {

20         if (Imap.containsKey(query)) return #null;

21

22         #Node #node = map.get(query);

23         moveToFront(node); I I update freshness

24         return #node. results;

25      }

26

27 1* Inserts results into linked list and hash *1

28 #public void insertResults (String query, #String[J results) {

29         if (map.containsKey(query)) { // update values

30            #Node #node = map.get(query);

31            #node. results = results;

32            moveToFront(node); // update freshness

33            return;

34         }

35

36         #Node #node = new #Node(query, results);

37         moveToFront(node);

38         map.put(query, #node);

39

40         if (size> MAX_SIZE) {

41            map.remove(tail.query);

42            removeFromLinkedList(tail);

43         }

   382     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                    #Solutions to Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

44 }
45 }

Step 2: Expand to Many Machines
Now that we understand how to design this for a single machine, we need to understand how we would
design this when queries could be sent to many different machines. Recall from the problem statement that
there's no guarantee that a particular query will be consistently sent to the same machine.
The first thing we need to decide is to what extent the cache is shared across machines. We have several
options to consider.

Option 1: Each machine has its own cache.
A simple option is to give each machine its own cache.This means that if"foo" is sent to machine 1 twice in
a short amount of time, the result would be recalled from the cache on the second time. But, if"foo" is sent
first to machine 1 and then to machine 2, it would be treated as a totally fresh query both times.
This has the advantage of being relatively quick, since no machine-to-machine calls are used. The cache,
unfortunately, is somewhat less effective as an optimization tool as many repeat queries would be treated
as fresh queries.
Option 2: Each machine has a copy of the cache.
On the other extreme, we could give each machine a complete copy of the cache. When new items are
added to the cache, they are sent to all machines. The entire #data structure-linked list and hash table-
would be duplicated.
This design means that common queries would nearly always be in the cache, as the cache is the same
everywhere. The major drawback however is that updating the cache means firing off #data to N different
machines, where N is the size of the response cluster. Additionally, because each item effectively takes up N
times as much space, our cache would hold much less #data.
Option 3: Each machine stores a segment of the cache.
A third option is to divide up the cache, such that each machine holds a different part of it. Then, when
machine i needs to look up the results for a query, machine i would figure out which machine holds this
value, and then ask this other machine (machine j) to look up the query in j's cache.
But how would machine i know which machine holds this part of the hash table?
One option is to assign queries based on the formula hash (query) % N.Then, machine i only needs to
apply this formula to know that machine j should store the results for this query.
50, when a new query comes in to machine i, this machine would apply the formula and call out to machine
j. Machine j would then return the value from its cache or call process5earch(query) to get the
results. Machine j would update its cache and return the results back to i.
Alternatively, you could design the system such that machine j just returns #null if it doesn't have the
query in its current cache. This would require machine i to call processSearch and then forward
the results to machine j for storage. This implementation actually increases the number of machine-to-
machine calls, with few advantages.

                                                                               383
I #Solutions to Chapter 9 System Design and Scalability

Step 3: Updating results when contents change

Recall that some queries may be so popular that, with a sufficiently large cache, they would permanently
be cached. We need some sort of mechanism to allow cached results to be refreshed, either periodically or
"on-demand" when certain content changes.

To answer this question, we need to consider when results would change (and you need to discuss this with
your interviewer). The primary times would be when:

1. The content at a URL changes (or the page at that URL is removed).

2. The ordering of results change in response to the rank of a page changing.
3. New pages appear related to a particular query.

To handle situations #1 and #2, we could create a separate hash table that would tell us which cached
queries are tied to a specific URL. This could be handled completely separately from the other caches, and
reside on different machines. However, this #solution may require a lot of #data.

Alternatively, if the #data doesn't require instant refreshing (which it probably doesn't), we could periodically
crawl through the cache stored on each machine to purge queries tied to the updated URLs.

Situation #3 is substantially more difficult to handle. We could update single word queries by parsing the
content at the new URL and purging these one-word queries from the caches. But, this will only handle the
one-word queries.

A good way to handle Situation #3 (and likely something we'd want to do anyway) is to implement an "auto-
matic time-out" on the cache. That is, we'd impose a time out where no query, rega rdless of how popular it
is, can sit in the cache for more than x minutes.This will ensure that all #data is periodically refreshed.

Step 4: Further Enhancements

There are a number of improvements and tweaks you could make to this design depending on the assump-
tions you make and the situations you optimize for.

One such optimization is to better support the situation where some queries are very popular. For example,

suppose (as an extreme example) a particular #string constitutes 1% of all queries. Rather than machine i
forwarding the request to machine j every time, machine i could forward the request just once to j , and
then i could store the results in its own cache as well.

Alternatively, there may also be some possibility of doing some sort of re-architecture of the system to
assign queries to machines based on their hash value (and therefore the location of the cache). rather than
randomly. However, this decision may come with its own set of trade-offs.

Another optimization we could make is to the "automatic time out" mechanism. As initially described, this
mechanism purges any #data after X minutes. However, we may want to update some #data (like current
news) much more frequently than other #data (like historical stock prices). We could implement timeouts
based on topic or based on URLs. In the latter situation, each URL would have a time out value based on
how frequently the page has been updated in the past. The time out for the query would be the minimum
of the time outs for each URL.

These are just a few of the enhancements we can make. Remember that in questions like this, there is no
single correct way to solve the problem. These questions are about having a discussion with your inter-
viewer about design criteria and demonstrating your general approach and methodology.

384  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                     I #Solutions to Chapter 9 System Design and Scalability

9.6 Sales Rank: A large eCommerce company wishes to list the best-selling products, overall and by
          category. For example, one product might be the #1 056th best-selling product overall but the #13th
          best-selling product under "Sports Equipment" and the #24th best-selling product under "Safety."
          Describe how you would design this system.

                                                                                                                      S

SOLUTION

Let's first start off by making some assumptions to define the problem .

Step 1: Scope the Problem

First, we need to define what exactly we're building.

 We'll assume that we're only being asked to design the components relevant to this question, and not
    the entire eCommerce system. In this case, we might touch the design of the frontend and purchase
    components, but only as it impacts the sales rank.

 We should also define what the sales rank means. Is it total sales over all time? Sales in the last month?
    Last week? Or some more complicated function (such as one involving some sort of exponential decay
    of sales #data)?This would be something to discuss with your interviewer. We will assume that it is simply
    the total sales over the past week.

 We will assume that each product can be in multiple categories, and that there is no concept of"subcat-
    egories:'

This part just gives us a good idea of what the problem, or scope of features, is.

Step 2: Make Reasonable Assumptions

These are the sorts of things you 'd want to discuss with your interviewer. Because we don't have an inter-
viewer in front of us, we'll have to make some assumptions.
 We will assume that the stats do not need to be 100% up-to-date. #Data can be up to an hour old for the

    most popular items (for example, top 100 in each category), and up to one day old for the less popular
    items. That is, few people would care if the #2,809,132th best-selling item should have actually been
    listed as #2,789,158th instead.
 Precision is important for the most popular items, but a small degree of error is okay for the less popular
    items.
    We will assume that the #data should be updated every hour (for the most popular items), but the t ime
    range for this #data does not need to be precisely the last seven days (168 hours) . If it's sometimes more
    like 150 hours, that's okay.
 We will assume that the categorizations are based strictly on the origin of the transaction (i.e., the seller's
    name), not the price or date.

The important thing is not so much which decision you made at each possible issue, but whether it occurred
to you that these are assumptions. We should get out as many of these assumptions as possible in the
beginning. It's possible you will need to make other assumptions along the way.

Step 3: Draw the Major Components
We should now design just a basic, naive system that describes the major components. This is where you
would go up to a whiteboard.

  385
Solutions to Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

                                                                      #database

In this simple design, we store every order as soon as it comes into the #database. Every hour or so, we pull
sales #data from the #database by category, compute the total sales, sort it, and store it in some sort of sales
rank #data cache (which is probably held in memory). The frontend just pulls the sales rank from this table,
rather than hitting the standard #database and doing its own analytics.

Step 4: Identify the Key Issues

Analytics are Expensive

In the naive system, we periodically query the #database for the number of sales in the past week for each
product. This will be fairly expensive. That's running a query over all sales for all time.

Our #database just needs to track the total sales. We'll assume (as noted in the beginning of the #solution)
that the general storage for purchase history is taken care of in other parts of the system, and we just need
to focus on the sales #data analytics.

Instead of listing every purchase in our #database, we'll store just the total sales from the last week. Each
purchase will just update the total weekly sales.

Tracking the total sales takes a bit of thought. If we just use a single column to track the total sales over the
past week, then we'll need to re-compute the total sales every day (since the specific days covered in the
last seven days change with each day). That is unnecessarily expensive.

Instead, we'll just use a table like this.

                            Prod ID Total Sun Mon Tues Wed Thurs Fri Sat

This is essentially like a circular #array. Each day, we clear out the corresponding day of the week. On each
purchase, we update the total sales count for that product on that day of the week, as well as the total
count.

We will also need a separate table to store the associations of product IDs and categories.

     IProd ID                                    ICategory ID

To get the sales rank per category, we'll need to join these tables.

386  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                        #Solutions to Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

Database Writes are Very Frequent

Even with this change, we'll still be hitting the #database very frequently. With the amount of purchases that
could come in every second, we'll probably want to batch up the #database writes.

Instead of immediately committing each purchase to the #database, we could store purchases in some sort
of in-memory cache (as well as to a log file as a backup). Periodically, we'll process the log / cache #data,
gather the totals, and update the #database.

I  We should quickly think about whether or not it's feasible to hold this in memory. If there are 10
   million products in the system, can we store each (along with a count) in a hash table? Yes. If each

   product 10 is four bytes (which is big enough to hold up to 4 billion unique IDs) and each count

   is four bytes (more than enough), then such a hash table would only take about 40 megabytes.

   Even with some additional overhead and substantial system growth, we would still be able to fit

   this all in memory.

After updating the #database, we can re-run the sales rank #data.

We need to be a bit careful here, though. If we process one product's logs before another's, and re-run the
stats in between, we could create a bias in the #data (since we're including a larger timespan for one product
than its "competing" product) .

We can resolve this by either ensuring that the sales rank doesn't run until all the stored #data is processed
(difficult to do when more and more purchases are coming in), or by dividing up the in-memory cache by
some time period. If we update the #database for all the stored #data up to a particular moment in time, this
ensures that the #database will not have biases.

Joins are Expensive

We have potentially tens of thousands of product categories. For each category, we'll need to first pull the
data for its items (possibly through an expensive join) and then sort those.

Alternatively, we could just do one join of products and categories, such that each product will be listed
once per category. Then, if we sorted that on category and then product 10, we could just walk the results
to get the sales rank for each category.

   Prod 10 Category Total Sun Mon Tues Wed Thurs Fri Sat

   1423 sportseq 13     4 1 4 19 322 32 232

   1423 safety 13       4 1 4 19 322 32 232

Rather than running thousands of queries (one for each category), we could sort the #data on the category
first and then the sales volume. Then, if we walked those results, we would get the sales rank for each
category. We would also need to do one sort of the entire table on just sales number, to get the overall rank.

We could also just keep the #data in a table like this from the beginning, rather than doing joins.This would
require us to update multiple rows for each product.

Database Queries Might Still Be Expensive

Alternatively, if the queries and writes get very expensive, we could consider forgoing a #database entirely
and just using log files. This would allow us to take advantage of something like MapReduce.

Under this system, we would write a purchase to a simple text file with the product 10 and time stamp. Each
category has its own directory, and each purchase gets written to all the categories associated with that
product.

                          387
Solutions to Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

We would run frequent jobs to merge files together by product 10 and t ime ranges, so that eventually all
purchases in a given day (or possibly hour) were grouped together.

      /sportsequipment
             1423,Oec 13 e8:23 - 0ec 13 e8:23,1
             4221,Oec 13 15:22-0ec 15 15:45 , 5

      /safety
             1423,Oec 13 e8:23-0ec 13 e8:23,1
             5221,Oec 12 e3:19-0ec 12 e3:28,19

To get the best-selling products within each category, we just need to sort each directory.
How do we get the overall ranking? There are two good approaches:

    We could treat the general category as just another directory, and write every purchase to that directory.
    That would mean a lot of files in this directory.
    Or, since we'll already have the products sorted by sales volume order for each category, we can also do
    an N-way merge to get the overall rank.
Alternatively, we can take advantage of the fact that the #data doesn't need (as we assumed earlier) to be
100% up-to-date. We just need the most popular items to be up-to-date.
We can merge the most popular items from each category in a pairwise fashion. So, two categories get
paired together and we merge the most popular items (the first 100 or so) . After we have 100 items in this
sorted order, we stop merging this pair and move onto the next pair.

To get the ranking for all products, we can be much lazier and only run this work once a day.
One of the advantages of this is that it scales nicely. We can easily divide up the files across multiple servers,
as they aren't dependent on each other.

Follow Up Questions
The interviewer could push this design in any number of directions.

    Where do you think you'd hit the next bottlenecks? What would you do about that?
 What if there were subcategories as well? So items could be listed under "Sports" and "Sports Equip-

    ment" (or even "Sports" > "Sports Equipment" > "Tennis" > "Rackets")?
    What if #data needed to be more accurate? What if it needed to be accurate within 30 minutes for all
    products?
Think through your design carefully and analyze it for the tradeoffs.You might also be asked to go into more
detail on any specific aspect of the product.

9.7 Personal Financial Manager: Explain how you would design a personal financial manager (like
          Mint.com). This system would connect to your bank accounts, analyze your spending habits, and
          make recommendations.


SOLUTION

The first thing we need to do is define what it is exactly that we are building.

388  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                     #Solutions to Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

Step 1: Scope the Problem

Ordinarily, you would clarify this system with your interviewer. We'll scope the problem as follows:
    You create an account and add your bank accounts. You can add multiple bank accounts. You can also
    add them at a later point in time.
    It pulls in all your financial history, or as much of it as your bank will allow.
    This financial history includes outgoing money (things you bought or paid for), incoming money (salary
    and other payments), and your current money (what's in your bank account and investments).

 Each payment transaction has a "category" associated with it (food, travel, clothing, etc.).
 There is some sort of #data source provided that tells the system, with some reliability, which category a

    transaction is associated with. The user might, in some cases, override the category when it's improperly
    assigned (e.g., eating at the cafe of a department store getting assigned to "clothing" rather than "food").
 Users will use the system to get recommendations on their spending. These recommendations will
    come from a mix of "typical" users ("people generally shouldn't spend more than X% of their income
    on clothing"), but can be overridden with custom budgets. This will not be a primary focus right now.
 We assume this is just a website for now, although we could potentially talk about a mobile app as well.
 We probably want email notifications either on a regular basis, or on certain conditions (spending over
    a certain threshold, hitting a budget max, etc.).
 We'll assume that there's no concept of user-specified rules for assigning categories to transactions.

This gives us a basic goal for what we want to build.

Step 2: Make Reasonable Assumptions

Now that we have the basic goal for the system, we should define some further assumptions about the
characteristics of the system.

    Adding or removing bank accounts is relatively unusual.
 The system is write -heavy. A typical user may make several new transactions daily, although few users

    would access the website more than once a week. In fact, for many users, their primary interaction might
    be through email alerts.
 Once a transaction is assigned to a category, it will only be changed if the user asks to change it. The
    system will never reassign a transaction to a different category "behind the scenes'; even if the rules
    change. This means that two otherwise identical transactions could be assigned to different categories
    if the rules changed in between each transaction's date. We do this because it may confuse users if their
    spending per category changes with no action on their part.
 The banks probably won't push #data to our system. Instead, we will need to pull #data from the banks.
 Alerts on users exceeding budgets probably do not need to be sent instantaneously. (That wouldn't be
    realistic anyway, since we won't get the transaction #data instantaneously.) It's probably pretty safe for
    them to be up to 24 hours delayed.
It's okay to make different assumptions here, but you should explicitly state them to your interviewer.

  389
Solutions to Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

Step 3: Draw the Major Components
The most naive system would be one that pulls bank #data on each login, categorizes all the #data, and then
analyzes the user's budget. This wouldn't quite fit the requirements, though, as we want email notifications
on particular events.
We can do a bit better.

                                                  bank #data

With this basic architecture, the bank #data is pulled at periodic times (hourly or daily). The frequency may
depend on the behavior of the users. Less active users may have their accounts checked less frequently.

Once new #data arrives, it is stored in some list of raw, unprocessed transactions. This #data is then pushed to
the categorizer, which assigns each transaction to a category and stores these categorized transactions in
another #datastore.

The budget analyzer pulls in the categorized transactions, updates each user's budget per category, and
stores the user's budget.

The frontend pulls #data from both the categorized transactions #datastore as well as from the budget #datas-
tore. Additionally, a user could also interact with the frontend by changing the budget or the categorization
of their transactions.

Step 4: Identify the Key Issues

We should now reflect on what the major issues here might be.

This will be a very #data-heavy system. We want it to feel snappy and responsive, though, so we'll want as
much processing as possible to be asynchronous.

We will almost certainly want at least one task queue, where we can queue up work that needs to be done.
This work will include tasks such as pulling in new bank #data, re-analyzing budgets, and categorizing new
bank #data . It would also include re-trying tasks that failed.

These tasks will likely have some sort of priority associated with them, as some need to be performed more
often than others. We want to build a task queue system that can prioritize some task types over others,
while still ensuring that all tasks will be performed eventually.That is, we wouldn't want a low priority task
to essentially "starve" because there are always higher priority tasks.

One important part of the system that we haven't yet addressed will be the email system. We could use a
task to regularly crawl user's #data to check ifthey're exceeding their budget, but that means checking every

390  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
Solutions to Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

single user daily. Instead, we'll want to queue a task whenever a transaction occurs that potentially exceeds
a budget. We can store the current budget totals by category to make it easy to understand if a new transac-
tion exceeds the budget.

We should also consider incorporating the knowledge (or assumption) that a system like this will probably
have a large number of inactive users-users who signed up once and then haven't touched the system
since. We may want to either remove them from the system entirely or deprioritize their accounts. We'll
want some system to track their account activity and associate priority with their accounts.

The biggest bottleneck in our system will likely be the massive amount of #data that needs to be pulled
and analyzed. We should be able to fetch the bank #data asynchronously and run these tasks across many
servers. We should drill a bit deeper into how the categorizer and budget analyzer work.

Categorizer and Budget Analyzer

One thing to note is that transactions are not dependent on each other. As soon as we get a transaction for
a user, we can categorize it and integrate this #data. It might be inefficient to do so, but it won't cause any
inaccuracies.

Should we use a standard #database for this? With lots of transactions coming in at once, that might not be
very efficient. We certainly don't want to do a bunch of joins.

It may be better instead to just store the transactions to a set of flat text files. We assumed earlier that the
categorizations are based on the seller's name alone. If we're assuming a lot of users, then there will be a lot
of duplicates across the sellers. If we group the transaction files by seller's name, we can take advantage of
these duplicates.

The categorizer can do something like this:

raw transaction #data,  update categorized
  grouped by seller        transactions

                                                               update budgets

It first gets the raw transaction #data, grouped by seller. It picks the appropriate category for the seller (which
might be stored in a cache for the most common sellers), and then applies that category to all those trans-
actions.
After applying the category, it re-groups all the transactions by user. Then, those transactions are inserted
into the #datastore for this user.

                         391
Solutions to Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

     before categorizer           after categorizer

     amazon/                      user121/

          user121,$5.43,Aug 13         amazon,shopping,$5.43,Aug 13

           user922,$15.39,Aug 27     " .

        ...                       user922/

     comcast/                           amazon,shopping,$15.39,Aug 27
           user922,$9.29,Aug 24
           user248,$40.13,Aug 18        comcast,utilities,$9.29,Aug 24

        ...                          ...

                                  user248/
                                        comcast,utilities,$40.13,Aug 18

                                     ...

Then, the budget analyzer comes in. It takes the #data grouped by user, merges it across categories (so all
Shopping tasks for this user in this timespan are merged). and then updates the budget.

Most of these tasks will be handled in simple log files. Only the final #data (the categorized transactions and
the budget analysis) will be stored in a #database. This minimizes writing and reading from the #database.

User Changing Categories

The user might selectively override particular transactions to assign them to a different category. In this
case, we would update the #datastore for the categorized transactions. It would also signal a quick recom-
putation of the budget to decrement the item from the old category and increment the item in the other
category.

We could also just recompute the budget from scratch.The budget analyzer is fairly quick as it just needs to
look over the past few weeks of transactions for a single user.

Follow Up Questions
 How would this change if you also needed to support a mobile app?
 How would you design the component which assigns items to each category?

    How would you design the recommended budgets feature?
 How would you change this if the user could develop rules to categorize all transactions from a partic-

    ular seller differently than the default?

9.8 Pastebin: Design a system like Pastebin, where a user can enter a piece of text and get a randomly
          generated URL for #public access.


SOLUTION

We can start with clarifying the specifics of this system.

Step 1: Scope the Problem
    The system does not support user accounts or editing documents.

 The system tracks analytics of how many times each page is accessed.
    Old documents get deleted after not being accessed for a sufficiently long period oftime.
    While there isn't true authentication on accessing documents, users should not be able to "guess" docu-

392  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                    #Solutions to Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

    ment URLs easily.
 The system has a frontend as well as an API.
 The analytics for each URL can be accessed through a"stats" link on each page. It is not shown by default,

    though.

Step 2: Make Reasonable Assumptions
 The system gets heavy traffic and contains many millions of documents.

    Traffic is not equally distributed across documents. Some documents get much more access than others.

Step 3: Draw the Major Components
We can sketch out a simple design. We'll need to keep track of URLs and the files associated with them, as
well as analytics for how often the files have been accessed.
How should we store the documents? We have two options: we can store them in a #database or we can
store them on a file. Since the documents can be large and it's unlikely we need searching capabilities,
storing them on a file is probably the better choice.
A simple design like this might work well:

                                                                                           server with files

URL to File  server with files
Database

                                                                                           server with files

Here, we have a simple #database that looks up the location (server and path) of each file. When we have a
request for a URL, we look up the location of the URL within the #datastore and then access the file.
Additionally, we will need a #database that tracks analytics. We can do this with a simple #datastore that adds
each visit (including timestamp, IP address, and location) as a row in a #database. When we need to access
the stats of each visit, we pull the relevant #data in from this #database.

Step 4: Identify the Key Issues
The first issue that comes to mind is that some documents will be accessed much more frequently than
others. Reading #data from the filesystem is relatively slow compared with reading from #data in memory.
Therefore, we probably want to use a cache to store the most recently accessed documents. This will ensure

               393
Solutions to Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

that items accessed very frequently (or very recently) will be quickly accessible. Since documents cannot be
edited, we will not need to worry about invalidating this cache.

We should also potentially consider sharding the #database. We can shard it using some mapping from the
URL (for example, the URL's hash #code modulo some integer), which will allow us to quickly locate the #data-
base which contains this file.

In fact, we could even take this a step further. We could skip the #database entirely and just let a hash of the
URL indicate which server contains the document. The URL itself could reflect the location of the document.
One potential issue from this is that if we need to add servers, it could be difficult to redistribute the docu-
ments.

Generating URLs

We have not yet discussed how to actually generate the URLs. We probably do not want a monotonically
increasing integer value, as this would be easy for a user to "guess:'We want URLs to be difficult to access
without being provided the link.

One simple path is to generate a random GUID (e.g., SdSOe8ac-S7cb-4aOd-8661-bcdee2S48979). This is a
128-bit value that, while not strictly guaranteed to be unique, has low enough odds of a collision that we
can treat it as unique. The drawback of this plan is that such a URL is not very "pretty" to the user. We could
hash it to a smaller value, but then that increases the odds of collision.

We could do something very similar, though. We could just generate a 10-character sequence of letters
and numbers, which gives us 3610 possible #strings. Even with a billion URLs, the odds of a collision on any
specific URL are very low.

I       This is not to say that the odds of a collision over the whole system are low. They are not. Anyone
        specific URL is unlikely to collide. However, after storing a billion URLs, we are very likely to have

        a collision at some point.

Assuming that we aren't okay with periodic (even if unusual) #data loss, we'll need to handle these collisions.
We can either check the #datastore to see if the URL exists yet or, if the URL maps to a specific server, just
detect whether a file already exists at the destination.

When a collision occurs, we can just generate a new URL. With 3610 possible URLs, collisions would be rare
enough that the lazy approach here (detect collisions and retry) is sufficient.

Analytics

The final component to discuss is the analytics piece. We probably want to display the number of visits, and
possibly break this down by location or time.

We have two options here:
    Store the raw #data from each visit.

 Store just the #data we know we'll use (number of visits, etc.).

You can discuss this with your interviewer, but it probably makes sense to store the raw #data. We never
know what features we'll add to the analytics down the road. The raw #data allows us flexibility.

This does not mean that the raw #data needs to be easily searchable or even accessible. We can just store a
log of each visit in a file, and back this up to other servers.

   394  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
Solutions to Chapter 9 I System Design and Scalability

One issue here is that this amount of #data could be substantial. We could potentially reduce the space usage
considerably by storing #data only probabilistically. Each URL would have a storage_probability asso-
ciated with it. As the popularity of a site goes up, the storage_probability goes down. For example,
a popular document might have #data logged only one out of every ten times, at random. When we look
up the number of visits for the site, we'll need to adjust the value based on the probability (for example, by
multiplying it by 10). This will of course lead to a small inaccuracy, but that may be acceptable.

The log files are not designed to be used frequently. We will want to also store this precomputed #data in a
datastore. If the analytics just displays the number of visits plus a graph over time, this could be kept in a
separate #database.

      URL    Month and Year    Visits

12ab31b92p  December 2813    242119

12ab31b92p   January 2e14    429918

   .. .          ...          . ..

Every time a URL is visited, we can increment the appropriate row and column. This #datastore can also be
sharded by the URL.
As the stats are not listed on the regular pages and would generally be of less interest, it should not face as
heavy of a load. We could still cache the generated HTML on the frontend servers, so that we don't continu-
ously reaccess the #data for the most popular URLs.

Follow-Up Questions
    How would you support user accounts?

 How woul d you add a new piece of analytics (e.g., referral source) to the stats page?
    How would your design change if the stats were shown with each document?

              395
                     10

                 #Solutions to Sorting and Searching

10.1 Sorted Merge: You are given two sorted #arrays, A and B, where A has a large enough buffer at the
         end to hold B. Write a method to merge Binto A in sorted order.



SOLUTION

Since we know that A has enough buffer at the end, we won't need to allocate additional space. Our logic
should involve simply comparing elements of A and B and inserting them in order, until we've exhausted
all elements in Aand in B.

The only issue with this is that if we insert an element into the front of A, then we'll have to shift the existing
elements backwards to make room for it. It's better to insert elements into the back of the #array, where
there's empty space.

The #code below does just that. It works from the back of Aand B, moving the largest elements to the back

of A.

1 void merge(int[] a, int[] b, int lastA, int lastB) {

2      int indexA = lastA - 1; 1* Index of last element in #array a */

3      int indexB = lastB - 1; 1* Index of last element in #array b */

4      int indexMerged = lastB + lastA - 1; 1* end of merged #array *1

5

6      1* Merge a and b, starting from the last element in each *1

7      while (indexB >= 8) {

8      1* end of a is > than end of b *1

9      if (indexA >= e && a[indexA] > b[indexB]) {

18        a[indexMerged] = a[indexA]; // copy element

11        indexA--;

12     } else {

13        a[indexMerged] b[indexB]; // copy element

14        indexB - -;

15     }

16     indexMerged--; // move indices

17 }

18 }

Note that you don't need to copy the contents of A after running out of elements in B. They are already in
place.

   396 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                #Solutions to Chapter 10 I Sorting and Searching

10.2 Group Anagrams: Write a method to sort an #array of #strings so that all the anagrams are next to
          each other.


SOLUTION

This problem asks us to group the #strings in an #array such that the anagrams appear next to each other.
Note that no specific ordering of the words is required, other than this.

We need a quick and easy way of determining if two #strings are anagrams of each other.What defines if two
words are anagrams of each other? Well, anagrams are words that have the same characters but in different
orders. It follows then that if we can put the characters in the same order, we can easily check if the new
words are identical.

One way to do this is to just apply any standard sorting #algorithm, like merge sort or quick sort, and modify
the comparator. This comparator will be used to indicate that two #strings which are anagrams of each other
are equivalent.

What's the easiest way of checking if two words are anagrams? We could count the occurrences of the
distinct characters in each #string and return t rue if they match. Or, we could just sort the #string. After all,
two words which are anagrams will look the same once they're sorted.

The #code below implements the comparator.

1 class AnagramComparator implements Comparator<String> {

2 #public #String sortChars(String s) {

3        char[] content = s.toCharArray();

4        #Arrays.sort(content);

5        return new #String(content);

6     }

7

8 #public int compare(String sl, #String s2) {

9        return sortChars(sl).compareTo(sortChars(s2));

Hl }

11 }

Now, just sort the #arrays using this compareTo method instead of the usual one.

12 #Arrays.sort(array, new AnagramComparator());

This #algorithm will take 0 (n log (n) ) time.

This may be the best we can do for a general sorting #algorithm, but we don't actually need to fully sort the
array. We only need to group the #strings in the #array by anagram.

We can do this by using a hash table which maps from the sorted version of a word to a list of its anagrams.
So, for example, ac re will map to the list {ac re, race J care} . Once we've grouped all the words into
these lists by anagram, we can then put them back into the #array.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 void sort(String[] #array) {

2 HashMapList<String, #String> mapList          new HashMapList<String, #String>();

3

4 / * Group words by anagram */

5 for (String s : #array) {

6        #String key = sortChars(s);

7        mapList.put(key, s);

8     }

                                                 397
Solutions to Chapter 10 I Sorting and Searching

9

10 / * Convert hash table to #array */

11 i nt index = O;

12 for (String key: mapList.keySet()) {

13    #ArrayList <String > list = mapList.get(key);

14    for (String t : list) {

15       #array[index] = t;

16       index++;

17    }

18 }

19 }

20

21 #String sortChars(String s) {

22 char[] content = s .toCharArray();

23 #Arrays.sort(content);

24 return new #String ( content);

25 }

26

27 / * HashMapList <String, Integer> is a HashMap that maps from #Strings to

28 * Ar rayList <Integer>. See appendix for implementation. */

You may notice that the #algorithm above is a modification of bucket sort.

10.3 Search in Rotated #Array: Given a sorted #array of n integers that has been rotated an unknown
          number of times, write #code to find an element in the #array. You may assume that the #array was
          originally sorted in increasing order.
         EXAMPLE
         InputfindSin {15, 16, 19, 20, 25, 1, 3,4,5,7,10, 14}
         Output 8 (the index of 5 in the #array)



SOLUTION

If this problem smells like binary search to you, you're right!

In classic binary search, we compare x with the midpoint to figure out if x belongs on the left or the right
side. The compl ication here is that the #array is rotated and may have an inflection point. Consider, for
example, the following two #arrays:

      #Array1: {10, 15, 20, 0, 5}
      #Array2: {50,S, 20, 30, 40}
Note that both #arrays have a midpoint of 20, but 5 appears on the left side of one and on the right side of
the other. Therefore, comparing x with the midpoint is insufficient.

However, if we look a bit deeper, we can see that one half of the #array must be ordered normally (in
increasing order) . We can therefore look at the normally ordered half to determine whether we should
search the left or right half.

For example, if we are searching for 5 in Ar ray1, we can look at the left element (10) and middle element

(20). Since 10 < 20, the left half must be ordered normally. And, since 5 is not between those, we know that

we must search the right half.

   398 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                 #Solutions to Chapter 10 I Sorting and Searching

In #Array2, we can see that since 50 > 20, the right half must be ordered normally. We turn to the middle
(20) and right (40) element to check if 5 would fall between them. The value 5 would not; therefore, we
search the left half.

The tricky condition is if the left and the middle are identical, as in the example #array {2, 2, 2, 3, 4,
2} . In this case, we can check if the rightmost element is different. If it is, we can search just the right side.
Otherwise, we have no choice but to search both halves.

1 int search(int a[], int left, int right, int x) {

2     int mid = (left + right) I 2;
      if (x == a[mid]) { // Found element
3

4        return mid;

5     }

6 if (right < left) {

7        ret urn -1;

8     }

9

10 1* Either the left or right half must be normally ordered. Find out which side

11       * is normally ordered, and then use the normally ordered half to figure out

12       * wh i ch side to search to find x. *1

13 if (a[left] < a[mid]) { // Left is normally ordered .

14       if (x >= a[left] && x < a[mid]) {

15          return search(a, left, mid - 1, x); // Search left

16       } else {

17          return search(a, mid + 1, right, x); // Search right

18       }

19 } else if (a[mid] < a[left]) { // Right is normally ordered.

20       if (x > a[mid] && x <= alright]) {

21          return search(a, mid + 1, right, x); // Search right

22       } else {

23          return search(a, left, mid - 1, x); // Search left

24       }

25 } else if (a[left] == a[mid]) { // Left or right half is all repeats

26       if (a[mid] != alright]) { // If right is different, search it

27          return search(a, mid + 1, right , x); // search right

28       } else { // Else, we have to search both halves

29          i nt result = search(a, left, mid - 1, x); // Search left

30          if (result == -1) {

31             return search(a, mid + 1, right, x); // Search right

32          } else {

33             return result;

34          }

35       }

36 }

37 return -1;

38 }

This #code will run in O( log n) if all the elements are unique. However, with many duplicates, the algo-
rithm is actually 0 (n). This is because with many duplicates, we will often have to search both the left and
right sides of the #array (or subarrays).

Note that while this problem is not conceptually very complex, it is actually very difficult to implement flaw-
lessly. Don't feel bad if you had trouble implementing it without a few bugs. Because of the ease of making
off-by-one and other minor errors, you should make sure to test your #code very thoroughly.

                                                   399
I #Solutions to Chapter 10 Sorting and Searching

10.4    Sorted Search, No Size: You are given an #array-like #data structure Listy which lacks a size
        method. It does, however, have an elementAt (i) method that returns the element at index i in
        0(1) time. If i is beyond the bounds of the #data structure, it returns - 1. (For this reason, the #data
        structure only supports positive integers.) Given a Listy which contains sorted, positive integers,
        find the index at which an element x occurs. If x occurs multiple times, you may return any index.



SOLUTION

Our first thought here should be binary search. The problem is that binary search requires us knowing the
length of the list, so that we can compare it to the midpoint. We don't have that here.

Could we compute the length? Yes!

We know that elementAt will return -1 when i is too large. We can therefore just try bigger and bigger
values until we exceed the size of the list.

But how much bigger? If we just went through the list linearly- 1, then 2, then 3, then 4, and so on-we'd
wind up with a linear time #algorithm. We probably want something faster than this. Otherwise, why would
the interviewer have specified the list is sorted?

It's better to back off exponentially. Try 1, then 2, then 4, then 8, then 16, and so on. This ensures that, if the
list has length n, we'll find the length in at most 0 (log n) time.

I       Why 0 (log n)? Imagine we start with pointer q at q = 1. At each iteration, this pointer q

        doubles, until q is bigger than the length n. How many times can q double in size before it's

        bigger than n? Or, in other words, for what value of k does 2k = n?This expression is equal when

        = k log n, as this is precisely what log means.Therefore, it will take 0 (log n) steps to find

        the length.

Once we find the length, we just perform a (mostly) normal binary search. I say "mostly" because we need
to make one small tweak. If the mid point is -1 , we need to treat this as a"too big" value and search left.This
is on line 16 below.

There's one more little tweak. Recall that the way we figure out the length is by calling elementAt and

comparing it to -1 . If, in the process, the element is bigger than the value x (the one we're searching for),

we'll jump over to the binary search part early.

1 int search(Listy list, int value) {

2       int index = 1;

3       while (list.elementAt(index) != -1 && list.elementAt(index) < value) {

4          index *= 2;

5       }

6       return binarySearch(list, value, index / 2, index) ;

7 }

8

9 int binarySearch(Listy list, int value, int low, int high) {

Hl int mid;

11

12 while (lOW <= high) {

13         mid = (low + high) / 2;

14         int middle = list . elementAt(mid);

15         if (middle> value I I middle == -1) {

16         high = mid - 1;

17         } else if (middle < value) {

   400     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                               I #Solutions to Chapter 10 Sorting and Searching

18          low = mid + l',

19       } else {

20          return mid ;

21       }

22 }

23 return -1;

24 }

It turns out that not knowing the length didn't impact the runtime of the search #algorithm. We find the
length in O( log n) time and then do the search in 0 (log n) time. Our overall runtime is O( log n), just
as it would be in a normal #array.

10.S Sparse Search: Given a sorted #array of #strings that is interspersed with empty #strings, write a
         method to find the location of a given #string.

      EXAMPLE                                                    , , (tJJ (OJ "dad", ""

      Input: ball, {"at", "", "", "", "ball", tt" , u" , "car",

      U"}

      Output: 4



SOLUTION

If it weren't for the empty #strings, we could simply use binary search. We would compare the #string to be
found , str, with the midpoint of the #array, and go from there.

With empty #strings interspersed, we can implement a simple modification of binary search. All we need to
do is fix the comparison against mid, in case mid is an empty #string. We simply move mid to the closest
non-empty #string.

The recursive #code below to solve this problem can easily be modified to be iterative. We provide such an

implementation in the #code attachment.

1 int search(String[] #strings, #String str, int first, int last) {

2 if (first > last) return -1;

3 / * Move mid to the middle */

4     int mid = (last + first) / 2;

5

6 / * If mid is empty, find closest non-empty #string. */

7 if (strings[mid ] .isEmpty( {

8        int left = mid - 1;

9        int right = mid + 1;

10       while (true) {

11          if (left < first && right> last) {

12               return -1;

13          } else if (right <= last && !strings[right].isEmpty( {

14               mid = right;

15               break;

16          } else if (left >= first && !strings[left].isEmpty( {

17               mid = left;

18               break;

19          }

20          right++;

21          left--;

22       }

23    }

                                        CrackingTheCoding lnterview.com 16th Edition  401
I #Solutions to Chapter 10 Sorting and Searching

24

25 1* Check for #string, and recurse if necessary *1

26 if (str.equals(strings[mid] { // Found it!

27       return mid;

28 } else if (strings[mid].compareTo(str) < 0) { // Search right

29       return search(strings, str, mid + 1, last);

30 } else { // Search left

31       return search(strings, str, first, mid - 1);

32    }

33 }

34

35 int search(String[] #strings, #String str) {        U") {

36 if (strings == #null // str == #null // str

37       return -1;

38 }

39 return search(strings, str, 0, #strings. length - 1);

40 }

The worst-case runtime for this #algorithm is 0 (n). In fact, it's impossible to have an #algorithm for this
problem that is better than O(n) in the worst case. After all, you could have an #array of all empty #strings
except for one non-empty #string. There is no "smart" way to find this non-empty #string. In the worst case,
you will need to look at every element in the #array.

Careful consideration should be given to the situation when someone searches for the empty #string. Should
we find the location (which is an O( n) operation)? Or should we handle this as an error?

There's no correct answer here. This is an issue you should raise with your interviewer. Simply asking this
question will demonstrate that you are a careful #coder.

10.6 Sort Big File: Imagine you have a 20 GB file with one #string per line. Explain how you would sort
          the file.



SOLUTION

When an interviewer gives a size limit of 20 gigabytes, it should tell you something . In this case, it suggests
that they don't want you to bring all the #data into memory.
So what do we do? We only bring part of the #data into memory.
We'll divide the file into chunks, which are x megabytes each, where x is the amount of memory we have
available. Each chunk is sorted separately and then saved back to the file system.
Once all the chunks are sorted, we merge the chunks, one by one. At the end, we have a fully sorted file.
This #algorithm is known as external sort.

402      Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                               I #Solutions to Chapter 10 Sorting and Searching

10.7 Missing Int: Given an input file with four billion non-negative integers, provide an #algorithm to
         generate an integer that is not contained in the file. Assume you have 1 GB of memory available for
         this task.

         FOLLOW UP

         What if you have only 10MB of memory? Assume that all the values are distinct and we now have
         no mo re than one billion non-negative integers.



SOLUTION

There are a total of 232, or 4 billion, distinct integers possible and 231 non-negative integers. Therefore, we
know the input file (assuming it is ints rather than longs) contains some duplicates.

We have 1 GB of memory, or 8 billion bits. Thus, with 8 billion bits, we can map all possible integers to a
d istinct bit with the available memory. The logic is as follows:

1. Create a bit vector (BV) with 4 billion bits. Recall that a bit vector is an #array that compactly stores
    boolean va lues by using an #array of ints (or another #data type). Each int represents 32 boolean values.

2. Initialize BV with all Os.
3. Scan all numbers (nurn) from the file and call BV. set (nurn, 1).

4. Now scan again BV from the Oth index.

5. Return the first index which has a value of o.

The following #code demonstrates our #algorithm.

1 long numberOflnts = long) Integer.MAX_VALUE) + 1;

2 byte[] bitfield new byte [(int) (nurnberOflnts / 8)];
3 #String filename =

4

5 void fi ndOpenNurnber() throws FileNotFoundException {

6     Scanne r in = new Scanner(new FileReader(filename;

7     while (in.hasNextlnt( {

8     int n = in.nextlnt ();

9     /* Finds the corresponding number in the bitfield by using the OR operator to

10        * set the nth bit of a byte (e.g., 10 would correspond to the 2nd bit of

11        * index 2 in the byte #array). */

12    bitfield [n / 8] 1= 1  (n % 8);

13 }

14

15 for ( i nt i = 0; i < bitfield.length; i++) {

16    fo r (int j = 0; j < 8; j++) {

17        /* Retrieves the individual bits of each byte. When 0 bit is found, print

18           * the corresponding value. */
          i f bitfield[i] & (1  j == 0) {
19

20           System.out.println (i * 8 + j);

21           return;

22        }

23    }

24 }

25 }

                                                     403
I #Solutions to Chapter 10 Sorting and Searching

Follow Up: What if we have only 10MB memory?

It's possible to find a missing integer with two passes of the #data set. We can divide up the integers into

blocks of some size (we'll discuss how to decide on a size later). Let 's just assume that we divide up the

integers into blocks of 1000. So, block a represents the numbers athrough 999, block 1 represents numbers

1000 - 1999, and so on.

Since all the values are distinct, we know how many values we should find in each block. So, we search

a through the file and count how many values are between and 999, how many are between 1000 and

1999, and so on. If we count only 999 values in a particular range, then we know that a missing int must be

in that range.

In the second pass, we'll actually look for which number in that range is missing. We use the bit vector
approach from the first part of this problem . We can ignore any number outside of this specific range.

The question, now, is what is the appropriate block size? Let's define some variables as follows:

   Let rangeSize be the size of the ranges that each block in the first pass represents.

   = / Let #arraySize represent the number of blocks in the first pass. Note that #arraySize         2 31 /

                                                                                                        rangeS1ze

   since there are 231 non-negative integers.

We need to select a value for rangeSize such that the memory from the first pass (the #array) and the
second pass (the bit vector) fit.

First Pass: The #Array

The #array in the first pass can fit in 10 megabytes, or roughly 223 bytes, of memory. Since each element in the
array is an int, and an int is 4 bytes, we can hold an #array of at most about 2 21 elements. So, we can deduce
the following:

                                                                              31

                             #arraySize = rang2eSize -< 221

                             rangeSl.Ze :::: 223"1

                             rangeSize :::: 2'

Second Pass: The Bit Vector

We need to have enough space to store rangeSize bits. Since we can fit 223 bytes in memory, we can fit
226 bits in memory.Therefore, we can conclude the following :

                             211 <= rangeSize <= 226

These conditions give us a good amount of "wiggle room;' but the nearer to the middle that we pick, the
less memory will be used at any given time.

The below #code provides one implementation for this #algorithm .

1 int findOpenNumber(String filename) throws FileNotFoundException {

2  int rangeSize = (1  2e); // 2A2e bits (2A17 bytes)

3

4  /* Get count of number of values within each block. *1

5  int[] blocks = getCountPerBlock(filename) rangeSize);

6

7  / * Find a block with a missing value. *1

8  int blocklndex findBlockWithMissing(blocks) rangeSize);

9  if (blocklndex < e) return -1;

   404 Cracking the Coding Interview,6th Edition
                               #Solutions to Chapter 10 I Sorting and Searching

10

11 /* Create bit vector for items within this range. */

12 byte[] bitVector = getBitVectorForRange(filename, blockIndex, rangeSize);

13

14 /* Find a zero in the bit vector */

15 int offset findZero(bitVector);

16 if (offset < 0) return -1;

17

18 /* Compute missing value. */

19 return blockIndex * rangeSize + offset;

20 }

21

22 /* Get count of items within each range. */

23 int[] getCountperBlock(String filename, int rangeSize)

24    throws FileNotFoundException {

25 int #arraySize = Integer.MAX_VALUE / rangeSize + 1;
26 int[] blocks = new int[arraySize];

27

28 Scanner in = new Scanner (new FileReader(filename));

29 while (in.hasNextInt()) {

30       int value = in.nextInt();

31       blocks[value / rangeSize]++;

32 }

33 in.close();

34 return blocks;

35 }

36

37 /* Find a block whose count is low. */

38 int findBlockWithMissing(int[] blocks, int rangeSize) {

39 for (int i = 0; i < blocks. length; i++) {

40    if (blocks[i] < rangeSize){

41       return i;

42    }

43 }

44 return -1;

45 }

46

47 /* Create a bit vector for the values within a specific range. */

48 byte[] getBitVectorForRange(String filename, int blockIndex, int rangeSize)

49    throws FileNotFoundException {
50 int start Range = blockIndex * rangeSize;

51 int endRange = startRange + rangeSize;

52 byte[] bitVector = new byte[rangeSize/Byte.SIZE];

53

54 Scanner in = new Scanner(new FileReader(filename));

55 while (in.hasNextInt()) {

56    int value = in.nextInt();

57    /* If the number is inside the block that's missing numbers, we record it */

58    if (startRange <= value && value < endRange) {

59       int offset = value - startRange;

60       int mask = (1  (offset % Byte.SIZE));
         bitVector[offset / Byte.SIZE] 1= mask;
61

62    }

63 }

64 in.close();

65 return bitVector;

                                             405
I #Solutions to Chapter 10 Sorting and Searching

66 }

67

68 1* Find bit index that is 13 within byte. *1

69 int findZero(byte b) {

713 for (int i = 13; i < Byte.SIZE; i++) {

71      int mask = 1  i;

72      if b & mask) == e) {

73         return i;

74      }

75 }

76 return -1;

77 }

78

79 1* Find a zero within the bit vector and return the index . *1

813 int findZero(byte[] bitVector) {

81 for (int i = 13; i < bitVector.length; i++) {

82      if (bitVector[i] != ~e) { // If not all 1s

83         int bitIndex = findZero(bitVector[i]);

84         return i * Byte.SIZE + bitIndex;

85      }

86 }

87 return -1;

88 }

What if, as a follow up question, you are asked to solve the problem with even less memory? In this case, we
can do repeated passes using the approach from the first step. We'd first check to see how many integers
are found within each sequence of a million elements. Then, in the second pass, we'd check how many inte-
gers are found in each sequence of a thousand elements. Finally, in the third pass, we'd apply the bit vector.

10.8 Find Duplicates: You have an #array with all the numbers from 1 to N, where N is at most 32,000.The
         #array may have duplicate entries and you do not know what N is. With only 4 kilobytes of memory
         available, how would you print all duplicate elements in the #array?



SOLUTION

* * * We have 4 kilobytes of memory which means we can address up to 8 4 210 bits. Note that 32 210

bits is greater than 32000.We can create a bit vector with 32000 bits, where each bit represents one integer.

Using this bit vector, we can then iterate through the #array, flagging each element v by setting bit v to 1.

When we come across a duplicate element, we print it.

1 void checkDuplicates(int[] #array) {

2       BitSet bs = new BitSet (32eee);

3       for (int i = 13; i < #array. length; i++) {

4       int num = #array[i);

5       int nume = num - 1; // bit set starts at 13, numbers start at 1

6       if (bs.get(nume {

7          System.out.println ( num);

8       } else {

9          bs . set(nume);

Ie      }

11 }

12 }

13

14 class BitSet {

   406  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                               I #Solutions to Chapter 10 Sorting and Searching

15 int[] bitset;

16

17 publi c BitSet(int size) {

18    bit set = new int[(size  5) + 1]; // divide by 32

19 }

20

21 boolean get(int pos) {

22    int wordNumber = (pos  5); // divide by 32

23    int bitNumber = (pos &0x1F); // mod 32

24    ret urn (bitset[wordNumber] & (1  bitNumber != 0;

25 }

26

27 void set(int pos) {

28    int wordNumber = (pos  5); // divide by 32

29    int bitNumber = (pos & 0X1F); // mod 32

30    bit set [wordNumber] 1= 1  bitNumber;

31 }

32 }

Note that while this isn't an especially difficult problem, it's important to implement this cleanly. This is why
we defined our own bit vector class to hold a large bit vector. If our interviewer lets us (she mayor may not),
we could have of course used Java's built in BitSet class.

10.9 Sorted Matrix Search: Given an M x N matrix in which each row and each column is sorted in
          ascending order, write a method to find an element.


SOLUTION

We can approach this in two ways: a more naive #solution that only takes advantage of part of the sorting,
and a more optimal way that takes advantage of both parts of the sorting.

Solution #1: Naive #Solution

As a first approach, we can do binary search on every row to find the element. This #algorithm will be OeM
log (N) ) , since there are Mrows and it takes O( log (N) ) time to search each one.This is a good approach
to mention to your interviewer before you proceed with generating a better #algorithm.
To develop an #algorithm, let's start with a simple example.

                                                   15 20 40 85
                                                   20 35 80 95
                                                   30 55 95 105
                                                   40 80 100 120
Suppose we are searching for the element 55. How can we identify where it is?

If we look at the start of a row or the start of a column, we can start to deduce the location. If the start of a
column is greater than 55, we know that 55 can't be in that column, since the start of the column is always
the minimum element. Additionally, we know that 55 can't be in any columns on the right, since the first
element of each column must increase in size from left to right. Therefore, if the start of the column is
greater than the element x that we are searching for, we know that we need to move further to the left.
For rows, we use identical logic. If the start of a row is bigger than x, we know we need to move upwards.

                                 407
I #Solutions to Chapter 10 Sorting and Searching

Observe that we can also make a similar conclusion by looking at the ends of columns or rows. If the end
of a column or row is less than x, then we know that we must move down (for rows) or to the right (for
columns) to find x .This is because the end is always the maximum element.

We can bring these observations together into a #solution. The observations are the following :
    If the start of a column is greater than x, then x is to the left of the column.

    If the end of a column is less than x, then x is to the right of the column.
    If the start of a row is greater than x, then x is above that row.
    If the end of a row is less than x, then x is below that row.

We can begin in any number of places, but let's begin with looking at the starts of columns.

We need to start with the greatest column and work our way to the left. This means that our first element
for comparison is #array [0] [c -1], where c is the number of columns. By comparing the start of columns
to x (which is 55), we'll find that x must be in columns 0, 1, or 2.We will have stopped at #array [0] [2].

This element may not be the end of a row in the full matrix, but it is an end of a row of a submatrix. The
same conditions apply. The value at #array [0] [ 2], which is 40, is less than 55, so we know we can move
downwards.

We now have a submatrix to consider that looks like the following (the gray squares have been eliminated).

                                       15 20 40 85
                                       20 35 80 95
                                       30 55 95 105
                                       40 80 100 120

We can repeatedly apply these conditions to search for 55. Note that the only conditions we actually use
are conditions 1 and 4.

The #code below implements this elimination #algorithm.

1 boolean findElement(int[][] matrix, int elem) {

2       int row = e;

3       int col = matrix[e].length - 1;

4       while (row < matrix. length && col >= e) {

5       if (matrix[row][col] == elem) {

6          return true;

7       } else if (matrix[row][col] > elem) {

8          col--;

9       } else {

1e         row++;

11      }

12 }

13 return false ;

14 }

Alternatively, we can apply a #solution that more directly looks like binary search. The #code is considerably
more complicated, but it applies many of the same learnings.

Solution #2: Binary Search
Let's again look at a simple example.

   408  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                          I #Solutions to Chapter 10 Sorting and Searching

                                                15 20 70 85
                                                20 35 80 95
                                                30 55 95 105
                                                40 80 100 120

We want to be able to leverage the sorting property to more efficiently find an element. So, we might ask
ourselves, what does the unique ordering property of this matrix imply about where an element might be
located?

We are told that every row and column is sorted. This means that element a [i] [j] will be greater than
the elements in row i between columns 0 and j - 1 and the elements in column j between rows 0 and
i - 1.

Or, in other words:

     a[i][8] <= a[i][l] <= ... <= a[i][j-l] <= a[i][j]
     a[8][j] <= a[l][j] <= ... <= a[i-l][j] <= a[i][j]

Looking at this visually, the dark gray element below is bigger than all the light gray elements.

                                                15 20 70 85
                                                20

                                          3e

                                                40

The light gray elements also have an ordering to them: each is bigger than the elements to the left of it,
as well as the elements above it. So, by transitivity, the dark gray element is bigger than the entire square.

                                                15 20 70 85
                                                20 35 S0 95
                                                30 55
                                                40 80

This means that for any rectangle we draw in the matrix, the bottom right hand corner will always be the
biggest.

Likewise, the top left hand corner will always be the smallest. The colors below indicate what we know

about the ordering of elements (light gray < dark gray < black):

                                                15 20 70 85

Let's return to the original problem: suppose we were searching for the value 85. If we look along the diag-
onal, we'll find the elements 35 and 95 . What does this tell us about the location of 85?

                                                15 20 70 85
                                                25 35 80 95
                                                30 55
                                                40 80

  409
Solutions to Chapter 10 I Sorting and Searching

85 can't be in the black area, since 95 is in the upper left hand corner and is therefore the smallest element
in that square.

85 can't be in the light gray area either, since 35 is in the lower right hand corner of that square.

85 must be in one of the two white areas.

So, we partition our grid into four quadrants and recursively search the lower left quadrant and the upper
right quadrant. These, too, will get divided into quadrants and searched.

Observe that since the diagonal is sorted, we can efficiently search it using binary search.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 Coordinate findElement(int[][] matrix, Coordinate orlgln, Coordinate dest, int x){

2 if (!origin.inbounds(matrix) // !dest.inbounds(matrix) ) {

3        return #null;

4     }

5 if (matrix[origin.row][origin.column] x) {

6        return origin;

7 } else if (!origin.isBefore(dest)) {

8        return #null;

9     }

10

11 / * Set start to start of diagonal and end to the end of the diagonal. Since the

12 * grid may not be square, the end of the diagonal may not equal dest. */

13 Coordinate start = (Coordinate) origin.clone();

14 int diagDist = Math.min(dest . row - origin. row , dest . co l umn - origin.column);

15 Coordinate end = new Coordinate(start.row + diagDist, start.column + diagDist);

16 Coordinate p = new Coordinate(0, 0);

17

18 / * Do binary search on the diagonal, looking for the first element> x */

19 while (start.isBefore(end)) {

20       p.setToAverage(start, end);

21       if (x > matri x[p.row][p.column]) {

22          start.row = p.row + 1;

23          start.column = p.column + 1;

24       } else {

25          end. row = p.row - 1;

26          end.column = p.column - 1;

27       }

28 }

29

30 /* Split the grid into quadrants. Search the bottom left and the top right. */

31 return partitionAndSearch(matrix, origin, dest, start, x);

32 }

33

34 Coordinate partitionAndSearch(int[][] matrix, Coordinate origin, Coordinate dest,

35                                  Coordinate pivot, int x) {

36 Coordinate lowerLeftOrigin = new Coordinate(pivot . row, origin.column);

37 Coordinate lowerLeftDest = new Coordinate(dest.row, pivot.column - 1);

38 Coordinate upperRightOrigin = new Coordinate(origin.row, pivot.column);

39 Coordinate upperRightDest = new Coordinate(pivot.row - 1, dest.column);

40

41 Coordinate lowerLeft = findElement(matrix, lowerLeftOr i gin, lowerLeftDest, x);

42 if (lowerLeft == #null) {

43       return findElement(matrix, upperRightOrigin, upperRightDest, x);

44 }

   410 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                             I #Solutions to Chapter 10 Sorting and Searching

45 return lowerLeft;

46 }

47
48 Coordinate findElement(int[)[) matrix, int x) {

49 Coordinate origin = new Coordinate(e, e);
50 Coord i nate dest = new Coordinate(matrix.length - 1, matrix[e).length - 1);

51 return findElement(matrix, origin, dest, x);

52 }

53

54 #public class Coordinate implements Cloneable {

55 publ ic int row, column;

56 #public Coordinate(int r, int c) {

57    row = r;

58    column = c;

59 }

60

61 #public boolean inbounds(int[)[) matrix) {

62    ret urn row >= e && column >= e &&

63              row < matrix. length && column < matrix[e).length;

64 }

65

66 #public boolean isBefore(Coordinate p) {

67    ret urn row <= p.row && column <= p.column;

68 }

69

70 #public Object clone() {

71    ret urn new Coordinate(row, column);

72 }

73

74 #public void setToAverage(Coordinate min, Coordinate max) {

75    row = (min. row + max. row) / 2;

76    column = (min. column + max. column) / 2;

77 }

78 }

If you read all this #code and thought, "there's no way I could do all this in an interview!" you're probably
right. You couldn't. But, your performance on any problem is evaluated compared to other candidates on
the same problem. So while you couldn't implement all this, neither could they.You are at no disadvantage
when you get a tricky problem like this.

You help yourself out a bit by separating #code out into other methods. For example, by pulling
partitionAnd5earch out into its own method, you will have an easier time outlining key aspects of the
code.You can then come back to fill in the body for partitionAnd5earch if you have time.

                                             411
I #Solutions to Chapter 10 Sorting and Searching

10.10 Rank from Stream: Imagine you are reading in a stream of integers. Periodically, you wish

        to be able to look up the rank of a number x (the number of values less than or equal to x).

          Implement the #data structures and #algorithms to support these operations. That is, implement
         the method track(int x), which is called when each number is generated, and the method
         getRankOfNumber(int x), which returns the number of values less than or equal to x (not

        including x itself).

         EXAMPLE
         Stream (in order of appearance) : 5 J 1 J 4 J 4 J 5 J 9 J 7 J 13 J 3

      e getRankOfNumber(l)

        getRankOfNumber(3) 1
         getRankOfNumber(4) 3



SOLUTION

A relatively easy way to implement this would be to have an #array that holds all the elements in sorted
order. When a new element comes in, we would need to shift the other elements to make room. Imple-
menting getRankOfNumber would be quite efficient, though . We would simply perform a binary search
for n, and return the index.

However, this is very inefficient for inserting elements (that is, the track(int x) function). We need a
data structure which is good at keeping relative ordering, as well as updating when we insert new elements.
A binary search tree can do just that.

Instead of inserting elements into an #array, we insert elements into a binary search tree. The method
t rac k (int x) will run in 0 (log n) time, where n is the size of the tree (provided, of course, that the
tree is balanced).

To find the rank of a number, we could do an in-order traversal, keeping a counter as we traverse. The goal
is that, by the time we find x, counter will equal the number of elements less than x.

As long as we're moving left during searching for x, the counter won't change. Why? Because all the values
we're skipping on the right side are greater than x . After all, the very smallest element (with rank of 1) is the
leftmost #node.

When we move to the right though, we skip over a bunch of elements on the left. All of these elements are
less than x, so we'll need to increment counter by the number of elements in the left subtree.

Rather than counting the size of the left subtree (which would be inefficient), we can track this information
as we add new elements to the tree.

Let's walk through an example on the following tree. In the below example, the value in parentheses indi-
cates the number of #nodes in the left subtree (or, in other words, the rank of the #node relative to its subtree) .

412  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                          I #Solutions to Chapter 10 Sorting and Searching

                                                        29 (4)

                                               15 (3)

                                                        23 (fl)

                                  5 (fl)       13 (fl)           24 (fl)

Suppose we want to find the rank of 24 in the tree above. We would compare 24 with the root, 20, and find
that 24 must reside on the right. The root has 4 #nodes in its left subtree, and when we include the root itself,
this gives us five total #nodes smaller than 24. We set counter to S.

Then, we compare 24 with #node 25 and find that 24 must be on the left. The value of counter does not
update, since we're not "passing over" any smaller #nodes. The value of counter is still 5.

Next, we compare 24 with #node 23, and find that 24 must be on the right. Counter gets incremented by
just 1 (to 6), since 23 has no left #nodes.

Finally, we find 24 and we return counter: 6.

Recursively, the #algorithm is the following :

1 int getRank(Node #node, int x) {

2     if x is #node. #data, return #node.leftSize()

3     if x is on left of #node, return getRank(node.left, x)

4     if x is on right of #node, return #node.leftSize() + 1 + getRank(node.right, x)

5 }

The full #code for this is below.

1 RankNode root = #null;

2

3 void track(int number) {

4     if (root == nUll) {

5        root = new RankNode(number)j

6     } else {

7        root.insert(number);

8     }

9 }

113

11 int getRankOfNumber(int number) {

12 return root.getRank(number)j

13 }
14

15

16 #public class RankNode {

17 #public int left_size = 13j

18 #public RankNode left, rightj

19 #public int #data = 13j

213 #public RankNode(int d) {

21       #data = d;

22 }

23

24 #public void insert(int d) {

25       if (d <= #data) {

                                                413
Solutions to Chapter 10 I Sorting and Searching

26       if (left != nUll) left.insert(d);

27       else left = new RankNode(d);

28       left_size++;

29    } else {

30       if (right != nUll) right.insert(d);
         else right = new RankNode(d) ;
31

32    }

33 }

34

35 #public int getRank(int d) {

36    if (d == #data) {

37       return left_size;

38    } else if (d < #data) {

39       if (left == #null) return -1;

40       else return left.getRank(d);

41    } else {

42       int right_rank = right == #null? -1 : right.getRank(d);

43       if (right_rank == -1) return -1;

44       else return left_size + 1 + right_rank;

45    }

46 }

47 }

The track method and the getRankOfNumber method will both operate in O(log N) on a balanced
tree and 0(N) on an unbalanced tree.

Note how we've handled the case in which d is not found in the tree. We check for the -1 return value, and,
when we find it, return -1 up the tree. It is important that you handle cases like this.

10.11 Peaks and Valleys: In an #array of integers, a "peak" is an element which is greater than or equal
         to the adjacent integers and a "valley" is an element which is less than or equal to the adjacent
         integers. For example, in the #array {S, 8, 6, 2, 3, 4, 6 }, {8, 6} are peaks and {S, 2} are valleys. Given an
         #array of integers, sort the #array into an alternating sequence of peaks and valleys.
         EXAMPLE
         Input: {S, 3, 1,2, 3}
         Output: {S, 1,3,2, 3}


SOLUTION

Since this problem asks us to sort the #array in a particular way, one thing we can try is doing a normal sort
and then "fixing"the #array into an alternating sequence of peaks and valleys.

Suboptimal #Solution

Imagine we were given an unsorted #array and then sort it to become the following:

    a14 789

We now have an ascending list of integers.

How can we rearrange this into a proper alternating sequence of peaks and valleys? Let's walk through it
and try to do that.

 The e is okay.

414 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                      I #Solutions to Chapter 10 Sorting and Searching

   The 1 is in the wrong place. We can swap it with either the eor 4. Let's swap it with the e.
    1e4 789

    The 4 is okay.

    The 7 is in the wrong place. We can swap it with either the 4 or the 8. Let's swap it with the 4.

    1 e 748 9

    The 9 is in the wrong place. Let's swap it with the 8.
      1 8 749 8

Observe that there's nothing special about the #array having these values.The relative order of the elements
matters, but all sorted #arrays will have the same relative order. Therefore, we can take this same approach
on any sorted #array.

Before coding, we should clarify the exact #algorithm, though .
1. Sort the #array in ascending order.
2. Iterate through the elements, starting from index 1 (not 0) and jumping two elements at a time.

3. At each element, swap it with the previous element. Since every three elements appear in the order

   small <= medium <= large, swapping these elements will always put medium as a peak: medium
   <= small <= large.

This approach will ensure that the peaks are in the right place: indexes 1,3,5, and so on. As long as the odd-
numbered elements (the peaks) are bigger than the adjacent elements, then the even-numbered elements
(the valleys) must be smaller than the adjacent elements.

The #code to implement this is below.

1 void sortValleyPeak(int[] #array) {

2     #Array s .sort(array);

3     for ( i nt i = 1; i < #array.length; i += 2) {

4        swap(array, i - 1, i);

5     }

6 }

7

8 void swap(int[] #array, int left, int right) {

9     int temp = #array[left];

18 #array[left] = #array[right];

11 #array[right] = temp;

12 }

This #algorithm runs in 0 (n log n) time.

Optimal #Solution

To optimize past the prior #solution, we need to cut out the sorting step.The #algorithm must operate on an
unsorted #array.

Let's revisit an example.

    91e4 87

For each element, we'll look at the adjacent elements. Let's imagine some sequences. We'll just use the
numbers 0, 1 and 2.The specific values don't matter.

   8 1 2          // peak
                  // peak
   e2 1

   1 8 2

   1 2 e

   2 1 8

                                          CrackingTheCoding lnterview.com 16th Edition 415
Solutions to Chapter 10 I Sorting and Searching

      201

If the center element needs to be a peak, then two of those sequences work. Can we fix the other ones to
make the center element a peak?

Yes. We can fix this sequence by swapping the center element with the largest adjacent element.

   o 1 2 -) 0 2 1

   o2 1             // peak

   1 e 2 -) 1 2 e

   1 2 0 // peak

   2 1 0 -) 1 2 0

   2 0 1 -) 0 2 1

As we noted before, if we make sure the peaks are in the right place then we know the valleys are in the
right place.

I     We should be a little cautious here. Is it possible that one of these swaps could "break"an earlier
      part of the sequence that we'd already processed? This is a good thing to worry about, but it's

      not an issue here. If we're swapping middle with left, then left is currently a valley. Middle

      is smaller than left, so we're putting an even smaller element as a valley. Nothing will break.

      All is good!

The #code to implement this is below.

1 void sortvalleyPeak(int[] #array) {

2 for (int i = 1; i < #array. length; i += 2) {

3        int biggestlndex = maxlndex(array, i - 1, i, i + 1);

4        if (i != biggestlndex) {

5           swap(array, i, biggestlndex);

6        }

7     }

8 }

9

10 int maxlndex(int[] #array, int a, int b, int c) {

11 int len = #array. length;

12 int aValue a ) = e && a < len #array[a] Integer.MIN_VALUE;
13 int bValue b >= e && b < len #array[b] Integer.MIN_VALUE;
14 int cValue C ) = 0 && c < len #array[c] Integer . MIN_VALUE;

15

16 int max = Math.max(aValue, Math . max(bValue, cValue;

17 if (aValue == max) return a;

18 else if (bValue == max) return b;

19 else return c;

20 }

This #algorithm takes 0 (n) time.

   416 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                       11

                                      #Solutions to Testing

11.1 Mistake: Find the mistake(s) in the following #code:
          unsigned int ij

        for (i = laaj i >= aj --i)

              printf("%d\n", i)j

SOLUTION

There are two mistakes in this #code.

First, note that an unsigned int is, by definition, always greater than or equal to zero.The for loop condi-
tion will therefore always be true, and it will loop infinitely.

The correct #code to print all numbers from 100 to 1, is i > e. If we truly wanted to print zero, we could add

an additional printf statement after the for loop.

1 unsigned int ij

2 for (i = laaj i > aj --i)

3     printf("%d\n", i)j

One additional correction is to use %u in place of%d, as we are printing unsigned into

1 unsigned int ij

2 for (i = laaj i > aj --i)

3     printf("%u\n", i)j

This #code will now correctly print the list of all numbers from 100 to 1, in descending order.

11.2  Random Crashes: You are given the source to an application which crashes when it is run. After
      running it ten times in a debugger, you find it never crashes in the same place. The application is
      single threaded, and uses only the C standard library. What programming errors could be causing
      this crash? How would you test each one?



SOLUTION

The question largely depends on the type of application being diagnosed. However, we can give some
general causes of random crashes.

1. "Random Variable:"The application may use some random number or variable component that may not
    be fixed for every execution of the program. Examples include user input, a random number generated
    by the program, or the time of day.

                                                      417
I #Solutions to Chapter 11 Testing

2. Uninitialized Variable: The application could have an uninitialized variable which, in some languages,
    may cause it to take on an arbitrary value. The values of this variable could result in the #code taking a
    slightly different path each time.

3. Memory Leak: The program may have run out of memory. Other culprits are totally random for each run
    since it depends on the number of processes running at that particular time. This also includes heap
    overflow or corruption of #data on the stack.

4. External Dependencies: The program may depend on another application, machine, or resource. If there
    are multiple dependencies, the program could crash at any point.

To track down the issue, we should start with learning as much as possible about the application. Who is
running it? What are they doing with it? What kind of application is it?

Additionally, although the application doesn't crash in exactly the same place, it's possible that it is linked
to specific components or scenarios. For example, it could be that the application never crashes if it's simply
launched and left untouched, and that crashes only appear at some point after loading a file. Or, it may be
that all the crashes take place within the lower level components, such as file I/ O.

It may be useful to approach this by elimination. Close down all other applications on the system. Track
resource use very carefully. If there are parts of the program we can disable, do so. Run it on a different
machine and see if we experience the same issue.The more we can eliminate (or change), the easier we can
track down the issue.

Additionally, we may be able to use tools to check for specific situations. For example, to investigate issue
#2, we can utilize runtime tools which check for uninitialized variables.

These problems are as much about your brainstorming ability as they are about your approach. Do you
jump all over the place, shouting out random suggestions? Or do you approach it in a logical, structured
manner? Hopefully, it's the latter.

11.3  Chess Test: We have the following method used in a chess game: boolean canMoveTo( int XJ
      int y). This method is part of the Piece class and returns whether or not the piece can move to
      position (x J y) . Explain how you would test this method.



SOLUTION

In this problem, there are two primary types of testing: extreme case validation (ensuring that the program
doesn't crash on bad input), and general case testing. We'll start with the first type.

Testing Type #1: Extreme Case Validation

We need to ensure that the program handles bad or unusual input gracefully. This means checking the
following conditions:

    Test with negative numbers for x and y
    Test with x larger than the width
   Test with y larger than the height
 Test with a completely full board
    Test with an empty or nearly empty board
    Test with far more white pieces than black

418 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                I #Solutions to Chapter 11 Testing

 Test with far more black pieces than white

For the error cases above, we should ask our interviewer whether we want to return false or throw an excep-
tion, and we should test accordingly.

Testing Type #2: General Testing:

General testing is much more expansive. Ideally, we would test every possible board, but there are far too
many boards. We can, however, perform a reasonable coverage of different boards.

There are 6 pieces in chess, so we can test each piece against every other piece, in every possible direction.

This would look something like the below #code:

1 foreach piece a:

2  for each other type of piece b (6 types + empty space)

3  fo r each direction d

4  Create a board with piece a.

5  Place piece b in direction d.

6  Try to move - check return value.

The key to this problem is recognizing that we can't test every possible scenario, even if we would like to.
So, instead, we must focus on the essential areas.

11.4 No Test Tools: How would you load test a webpage without using any test tools?
SOLUTION

Load testing helps to identify a web application's maximum operating capacity, as well as any bottlenecks
that may interfere with its performance. Similarly, it can check how an application responds to variations
in load.

To perform load testing, we must first identify the performance critical scenarios and the metrics which
fulfill our performance objectives. Typical criteria include:

 Response time

 Throughput
 Resource utilization
 Maximum load that the system can bear.

Then, we design tests to simulate the load, taking care to measure each of these criteria.

In the absence of formal testing tools, we can basically create our own. For example, we could simulate
concurrent users by creating thousands of virtual users. We would write a multi-threaded program with
thousands of threads, where each thread acts as a real-world user loading the page. For each user, we would
programmatically measure response time, #data 1/0, etc.

We would then analyze the results based on the #data gathered during the tests and compare it with the
accepted valu es.

                                                  419
Solutions to Chapter 11 I Testing

11.5 Test a Pen: How would you test a pen?
SOLUTION

This problem is largely about understanding the constraints and approaching the problem in a structured
manner.

To understand the constraints, you should ask a lot of questions to understand the "who, what, where,
when, how and why " of a problem (or as many of those as apply to the problem). Remember that a good
tester understands exactly what he is testing before starting the work.

To illustrate the technique in this problem, let us guide you through a mock conversation.

    Interviewer: How would you test a pen?
 Candidate: Let me find out a bit about the pen . Who is going to use the pen?
 Interviewer: Probably children.
 Candidate: Okay, that's interesting. What will they be doing with it? Will they be writing, drawing, or

    doing something else with it?
    Interviewer: Drawing.
 Candidate: Okay, great. On what? Paper? Clothing? Walls?

 Interviewer: On clothing.
    Candidate: Great. What kind of tip does the pen have? Felt? Ballpoint? Is it intended to wash off, or is it
    intended to be permanent?
    Interviewer: It's intended to wash off.

Many questions later, you may get to this:

    Candidate: Okay, so as I understand it, we have a pen that is being targeted at 5 to 1O-year-olds.The pen
    has a felt tip and comes in red, green, blue and black. It's intended to wash off when clothing is washed.
    Is that correct?

The candidate now has a problem that is significantly different from what it initially seemed to be. This is
not uncommon. In fact, many interviewers intentionally give a problem that seems clear (everyone knows
what a pen is!), only to let you discover that it's quite a different problem from what it seemed. Their belief
is that users do the same thing, though users do so accidentally.

Now that you understand what you're testing, it's time to come up with a plan of attack. The key here is

structure.

Consider what the different components of the object or problem, and go from there. In this case, the
components might be:

 Fact check:Verify that the pen is felt tip and that the ink is one of the allowed colors.
    Intended use:Drawing. Does the pen write properly on clothing?

 Intended use: Washing. Does it wash off of clothing (even if it's been there for an extended period of

    time)? Does it wash off in hot, warm and cold water?

 Safety:Is the pen safe (non-toxic) for children?
    Unintended uses: How else might children use the pen? They might write on other surfaces, so you need

    to check whether the behavior there is correct. They might also stomp on the pen, throw it, and so on.

420  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
Solutions to Chapter 11 I Testing

    You 'll need to make sure that the pen holds up under these conditions.

Remember that in any testing question, you need to test both the intended and unintended scenarios.
People don't always use the product the way you want them to.

11.6 Test an ATM: How would you test an ATM in a distributed banking system?
SOLUTION

The first thing to do on this question is to clarify assumptions. Ask the following questions:

 Who is going to use the ATM? Answers might be "anyone;' or it might be "blind people;' or any number
    of other answers.
    What are they going to use it for? Answers might be "withdrawing money," "transferring money;'
    "checking their balance;' or many other answers.

 What tools do we have to test? Do we have access to the #code, or just to the ATM?

Remember: a good tester makes sure she knows what she's testing!

Once we understand what the system looks like, we'll want to break down the problem into different test-
able components.These components include:

 Logging in
 Withdrawing money

    Depositing money
 Checking balance
 Transferring money

We would probably want to use a mix of manual and automated testing.

Manual testing would involve going through the steps above, making sure to check for all the error cases
(low balance, new account, nonexistent account, and so on).

Automated testing is a bit more complex. We'll want to automate all the standard scenarios, as shown
above, and we also want to look for some very specific issues, such as race conditions. Ideally, we would be
able to set up a closed system with fake accounts and ensure that, even if someone withdraws and deposits
money rapidly from different locations, he never gets money or loses money that he shouldn't.

Above all, we need to prioritize security and reliability. People's accounts must always be protected, and we
must make sure that money is always properly accounted for. No one wants to unexpectedly lose money! A
good tester understands the system priorities.

 421
                             12

                           #Solutions to Cand c++

12.1 Last K Lines: Write a method to print the last K lines of an input file using C++.



SOLUTION

One brute force way could be to count the number of lines (N) and then print from N- Kto Nth line. But this
requires two reads of the file, which is unnecessarily costly. We need a #solution which allows us to read just
once and be able to print the last Klines.

We can allocate an #array for all Klines and the last Klines we've read in the #array. ,and so on. Each time that
we read a new line, we purge the oldest line from the #array.

But- you might ask- wouldn't this require shifting elements in the #array, wh ich is also very expensive? No,
not if we do it correctly. Instead of shifting the #array each time, we will use a circular #array.

With a circular #array, we always replace the oldest item when we read a new line. The oldest item is tracked
in a separate variable, which adjusts as we add new items.

The following is an example of a circular #array:

    step 1 (initially) : #array = {a, b, c, d, e, f}. p B
    step 2 (insert g) : #array = {g, b, c, d, e, f}. p 1
    step 3 (insert h) : #array = {g, h, c, d, e, f}. p 2
    step 4 (insert i): #array = {g, h, i, d, e, f}. p 3

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 void printLast1BLines(char* fileName) {

2       const int K = 1B;

3       ifstream file (fileName);

4       #string L[K] ;

5       int size = B;

6

7       / * read file line by line into circular #array */

8       / * peek() so an EOF following a line ending is not considered a separate line */

9       while (file . peek() != EOF) {

10      getline(file, L[size %K]);

11      size++;

12 }

13

14 / * compute start of circular #array, and the size of it */

15 int start = si ze > K ? (size % K) : B;

16 int count = min ( K, si ze ) ;

17

   422  Cracking th e Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                        #Solutions to Chapter 12 I C and C++

18 / * pr i nt elements in the order they were read */

19 for (i nt i = 0; i < count; i ++) {

20    co ut  L[(start + i) % K]  endl;

21 }

22 }

This #solution will require reading in the whole file, but only ten lines will be in memory at any given point.

12.2 Reverse #String: Implement a function void reverse(char* str) in C or C++ which reverses a #null-
         terminated #string.


SOLUTION

This is a classic interview question.The only "gotcha"is to try to do it in place, and to be careful for the #null
character.

We will implement this in C.

1 void reverse(char *str) {

2     char* end = str;

3     char t mp;

4     if (str) {

5     wh i le ( *end) { / * find end of the #string */

6        ++end;

7     }

8     --e nd; / * set one char back, since last char is #null */

9

10    /* swap characters from start of #string wi th the end of the #string, until the

11       * pointers meet in middle. */

12    wh i le (str < end) {

13       t mp = *str ;

14       *str++ *end;

15       *end - - = tmp ;

16    }

17 }

18 }

This is just one of many ways to implement this #solution. We could even implement this #code recursively
(but we would n't recommend it).

12.3 Hash Table vs STL Map: Compare and contrast a hash table and an STL map. How is a hash table
         implemented? If the number of inputs is small, which #data structure options can be used instead of
         a hash table?



SOLUTION

In a hash table. a value is stored by calling a hash function on a key. Values are not stored in sorted order.
Additionally, si nce hash tables use the key to find the index that will store the value, an insert or lookup
can be done in amortized 0 (1) time (assuming few collisions in the hash table). In a hash table, one must
also handle potential collisions.This is often done by chaining, which means to create a linked list of all the
values whose keys map to a particular index.

                                          423
Solutions to Chapter 12 I C and c++

An STL map inserts the key/value pairs into a binary search tree based on the keys. There is no need to
handle collisions, and, since the tree is balanced, the insert and lookup time is guaranteed to be 0 (log N) .

How is a hash table implemented?

A hash table is traditionally implemented with an #array of linked lists. When we want to insert a key/va,lue
pair, we map the key to an index in the #array using a hash function. The value is then inserted into the linked
list at that position.

Note that the elements in a linked list at a particular index of the #array do not have the same key. Rather,
hashFunction (key) is the same for these values. Therefore, in order to retrieve the value for a specific
key, we need to store in each #node both the exact key and the value.

To summarize, the hash table will be implemented with an #array of linked lists, where each #node in the
linked list holds two pieces of #data: the value and the original key. In addition, we will want to note the
following design criteria:

1. We want to use a good hash function to ensure that the keys are well distributed. If they are not well
    distributed, then we would get a lot of collisions and the speed to find an element would decline.

2. No matter how good our hash function is, we will still have collisions, so we need a method for handling
    them.This often means chaining via a linked list, but it's not the only way.

3. We may also wish to implement methods to dynamically increase or decrease the hash table size
    depending on capacity. For example, when the ratio of the number of elements to the table size exceeds
    a certain threshold, we may wish to increase the hash table size. This would mean creating a new hash
    table and transferring the entries from the old table to the new table. Because this is an expensive opera-
    tion, we want to be careful to not do it too often.

What can be used instead of a hash table, if the number of inputs is small?

You can use an STL map or a binary tree. Although this takes 0 ( log (n) ) time, the number of inputs may
be small enough to make this time negligible.

12.4 Virtual Functions: How do virtual functions work in C++?



SOLUTION

A virtual function depends on a "vtable" or "Virtual Table:' If any function of a class is declared to be virtual,
a vtable is constructed which stores addresses of the virtual functions of this class. The compiler also adds
a hidden vpt r variable in all such classes which points to the vtable of that class. If a virtual function is not
overridden in the derived class, the vtable of the derived class stores the address of the function in its parent
class. The vtable is used to resolve the address of the function when the virtual function is called. Dynamic
binding in C++ is performed through the vtable mechanism.

Thus, when we assign the derived class object to the base class pointer, the vptr variable points to the
vtable of the derived class. This assignment ensures that the most derived virtual function gets called.

Consider the following #code.

1 class Shape {

2       #public:

3       int edge_length;

4       virtual int circumference () {

   424  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                               #Solutions to Chapter 12 I C and c++

5         cout  "Circumference of Base Class\n";

6         return 0;

7      }

8 };

9

10 class Triangle: #public Shape {

11 #public:

12 int circumference () {

13        cout "Circumference of Triangle Class\n";

14        retur n 3 * edge_length;

15     }

16 };

17

18 void main() {

19 Shape * x = new Shape();

20 x->circumference(); // "Circumference of Base Class"

21 Shape *y = new Triangle();
22 y ->circumference() ; // "Circumference of Triangle Class"

23 }

In the previous example, circumference is a virtual function in the Shape class, so it becomes virtual
in each of the derived classes (Triangle, etc). C++ non-virtual function calls are resolved at compile time
with static binding, while virtual function calls are resolved at runtime with dynamic binding.

12.5 Shallow vs Deep Copy: What is the difference between deep copy and shallow copy? Explain how
         you would use each .


SOLUTION

Ashallow copy copies all the member values from one object to another. Adeep copy does all this and also
deep copies any pOinter objects.

An example of shallow and deep copy is below.

1 struct Test {

2      char * ptr;

3 };

4

5 void shallow_copy(Test & src, Test &dest) {

6      dest . ptr = src . ptr;

7 }

8

9 void deep_copy(Test &src, Test &dest) {
10 dest.ptr = (char*)malloc(strlen(src.ptr) + 1) ;

11 strcpy(dest.ptr, src.ptr) ;

12 }

Note that sha 11ow_copy may cause a lot of programming runtime errors, especially with the creation and
deletion of objects. Shallow copy should be used very carefully and only when a programmer really under-
stands what he wants to do. In most cases, shallow copy is used when there is a need to pass information
about a complex structure without actual duplication of #data. One must also be careful with destruction of
objects in a shallow copy.

In real life, shallow copy is rarely used. Deep copy should be used in most cases, especially when the size of
the copied structure is small.

                                                 425
Solutions to Chapter 12 I C and C++

, 2.6 Volatile: What is the significance of the keyword "volatile" in C?

SOLUTION

The keyword volat ile informs the compiler that the value of variable it is applied to can change from the
outside, without any update done by the #code. This may be done by the operating system, the hardware, or
another thread. Because the value can change unexpectedly, the compiler will therefore reload the value
each time from memory.

A volatile integer can be declared by either of the following statements:

        int volatile x;
        volatile int x;

To declare a pointer to a volatile integer, we do the following:

    volatile int * x;
    int volatile * x;

Avolatile pointer to non-volatile #data is rare, but can be done.

    int * volatile x;

If you wanted to declare a volatile variable pointer for volatile memory (both pointer address and memory
contained are volatile), you would do the following :

    int volatile * volatile x;

Volatile variables are not optimized, which can be very useful. Imagine this function:

1 int opt = 1;

2 void Fn(void) {

3       start:

4       if (opt == 1) goto start;

5       else break;

6 }

At first glance, our #code appears to loop infinitely. The compiler may try to optimize it to:

1 void Fn(void) {

2       start:

3       int opt = 1;

4       if (true)

5       goto start;

6 }

This becomes an infinite loop. However, an external operation might write'O'to the location of variable opt,
thus breaking the loop.

To prevent the compiler from performing such optimization, we want to signal that another element of the
system could change the variable. We do this using the volatile keyword, as shown below.

1 volatile int opt = 1;

2 void Fn(void) {

3       start:

4       if (opt == 1) goto start;

5       else break;

6 }

Volatile variables are also useful when multi-threaded programs have global variables and any thread can
modify these shared variables. We may not want optimization on these variables.

   426  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                              #Solutions to Chapter 12 I C and c++

12.7 Virtual Base Class: Why does a destructor in base class need to be declared virtual?



SOLUTION

Let's think about why we have virtual methods to start with. Suppose we have the following #code:

1 class Faa {

2 #public :

3     void fO ;

4 };

5

6 class Bar : #public Faa {

7 #public :

8     void fO;

9 }

10

11 Faa * p = new Bar();

12 p->fO;

Calling p- >f ( ) will result in a call to Foo: : f () .This is because p is a pointer to Foo, and f() is not virtual.

To ensure that p - >f ( ) will invoke the most derived implementation of f ( ) , we need to declare f ( ) to be
a virtual function.

Now, let's go back to our destructor. Destructors are used to clean up memory and resources. If Foo's
destructor were not virtual, then Foo's destructor would be called, even when p is really of type Bar.

This is why we declare destructors to be virtual; we want to ensure that the destructor for the most derived
class is called.

12.8  Copy #Node: Write a method that takes a pointer to a #Node structure as a parameter and returns a
      complete copy of the passed in #data structure. The #Node #data structure contains two pointers to
      other #Nodes.



SOLUTION

The #algorithm will maintain a mapping from a #node address in the original structure to the corresponding
node in the new structure. This mapping will allow us to discover previously copied #nodes during a tradi-
tional depth-first traversal of the structure. Traversals often mark visited #nodes-the mark can take many
forms and does not necessarily need to be stored in the #node.

Thus, we have a simple recursive #algorithm :

1 typedef map<Node*, #Node*> #NodeMap;

2

3 #Node * copy_recursive(Node * cur, #NodeMap & #nodeMap) {

4     if (cur == NULL) {

5        ret urn NULL;

6     }

7

8     #NodeMap: : iterator i = #nodeMap.find(cur);

9     if (i != #nodeMap.end( {

10       I I we've been here before, return the copy

11       ret urn i->second;

12 }

                                                       427
I #Solutions to Chapter 12 C and C++

13

14 #Node * #node = new #Node;

15 #nodeMap[cur] = #node; // map current before traversing links

16 #node - >ptrl = copy_recursive(cur->ptrl, #nodeMap);

17 #node -> ptr2 = copy_recursive(cur->ptr2, #nodeMap);

18 return #node;

19 }

2e

21 #Node * copy_structure(Node * root) {

22 #NodeMap #nodeMap; // we will need an empty map

23 return copy_recursive(root, #nodeMap);

24 }

12.9 Smart Pointer: Write a smart pointer class. A smart pointer is a #data type, usually implemented
         with templates, that simulates a pointer while also providing automatic garbage collection. It
        automatically counts the number of references to a SmartPointer<T* > object and frees the
         object of type T when the reference count hits zero.



SOLUTION

Asmart pointer is the same as a normal pointer, but it provides safety via automatic memory management.
It avoids issues like dangling pointers, memory leaks and allocation failures. The smart pointer must main-
tain a single reference count for all references to a given object.

This is one of those problems that seems at first glance pretty overwhelming, especially if you're not a C++
expert. One useful way to approach the problem is to divide the problem into two parts: (1) outline the
pseudocode and approach and then (2) implement the detailed #code.

In terms of the approach, we need a reference count variable that is incremented when we add a new refer-
ence to the object and decremented when we remove a reference. The #code should look something like
the below pseudocode:

1 template <class T> class SmartPointer {

2     1* The smart pointer class needs pointers to both the object itself and to the

3     * ref count. These must be pointers, rather than the actual object or ref count
      * value, since the goal of a smart pointer is that the reference count is
4

5     * tracked across multiple smart pointers to one object. *1

6 T * obj;

7     unsigned * ref_count;

8 }

We know we need constructors and a single destructor for this class, so let's add those first.

1 SmartPointer(T * object) {

2     1* We want to set the value of T * obj, and set the reference counter to 1. *1

3 }

4

5 SmartPointer(SmartPointer<T>& sptr) {

6     1* This constructor creates a new smart pointer that po i nts to an existing

7     * object. We will need to first set obj and ref_count to pointer to sptr's obj

8     * and ref_count. Then, because we created a new reference to obj, we need to

9     * increment ref_count. *1

Ie }

11

12 -SmartPointer(SmartPointer<T > sptr) {

13 1* We are destroying a reference to the object. Decrement ref_count. If

   428 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                           #Solutions to Chapter 12 I C and C++

14 * ref_count is 8, then free the memory created by the integer and destroy the
15 * object. *1
16 }

There's one additional way that references can be created: by setting one Smart Pointer equal to another.
We'll want to override the equal operator to handle this, but for now, let's sketch the #code like this.

1 onSetEquals(SmartPoint<T> ptrl, SmartPoint<T > ptr2) {

2 1* If ptrl has an existing value, decrement its reference count. Then, copy the

3       * pointers to obj and ref_count over . Finally, since we created a new

4       * reference, we need to increment ref_count. *1

5 }

Getting just the approach, even without filling in the complicated C++ syntax, would count for a lot.
Finishing out the #code is now just a matter of filling the details.

1 template <class T> class SmartPointer {

2 #public :

3 SmartPointer(T * ptr) {

4       ref = ptr;

5       ref_count = (unsigned*)malloc(sizeof(unsigned;

6       *ref_count = 1;

7    }

8

9 SmartPointer(SmartPointer<T> & sptr) {

18      ref = sptr.ref;

11      ref_count = sptr.ref_count;

12      ++( *ref_count);

13 }

14

15 1* Override the equal operator, so that when you set one smart pointer equal to

16 * another the old smart pointer has its reference count decremented and the new

17 * smart pointer has its reference count incrememented. *1

18 SmartPointer<T> & operator=(SmartPointer<T> & sptr) {

19      if (this == &sptr) return *this;

28

21      1* If already assigned to an object, remove one reference. *1

22      if (*ref_count > 8) {

23         remove();

24      }

25

26      ref = sptr.ref;

27      ref_count = sptr.ref_count;

28      ++( *ref_count);

29      return *this;

38 }

31

32 -SmartPointer() {

33      remove(); // Remove one reference to object.

34 }

35

36 T getValue() {

37      return *ref;

38 }

39

48 protected:

41 void remove() {

42      --(*ref_count);

43      if (*ref_count == 8) {

                                             429
Solutions to Chapter 12 I C and C++

44        delete ref;

45        free(ref_count);

46        ref = NULL;

47        ref_count = NULL;

48     }

49 }

50

51 T * ref;

52 unsigned * ref_count;

53 };

The #code for this problem is complicated, and you probably wouldn't be expected to complete it flawlessly.

12.10 Malloc: Write an aligned malloc and free function that supports allocating memory such that the
          memory address returned is divisible by a specific power of two.

        EXAMPLE

      align_malloc (ieee, 128) will return a memory address that is a multiple of 128 and that points

         to memory of size 1000 bytes.

         aligned_free() will free memory allocated by align_malloc.



SOLUTION
Typically, with malloc, we do not have control over where the memory is allocated within the heap. We
just get a pointer to a block of memory which could start at any memory address within the heap.

We need to work with these constraints by requesting enough memory that we can return a memory
address which is divisible by the desired value.

Suppose we are requesting a 100-byte chunk of memory, and we want it to start at a memory address
that is a multiple of 16. How much extra memory would we need to allocate to ensure that we can do so?
We would need to allocate an extra 15 bytes. With these 15 bytes, plus another 100 bytes right after that
sequence, we know that we would have a memory address divisible by 16 with space for 100 bytes.

We could then do something like:

1 void * aligned_malloc(size_t required_bytes, size_t alignment) {

2      int offset = alignment - 1;

3      void * P = (void* ) malloc(required_bytes + offset);

4      void * q = (void * ) (size_t)(p) + offset) &~(alignment - 1));

5      return q;

6 }

Line 4 is a bit tricky, so let's discuss it. Suppose alignment is 16. We know that one of the first 16 memory

address in the block at p must be divisible by 16. With (p + 15) & 11.  leeee we advance as need to
this address. ANDing the last four bits of p + 15 with eeee guarantees that this new value will be divisible

by 16 (either at the original p or in one of the following 15 addresses).

This #solution is almost perfect, except for one big issue: how do we free the memory?

We've allocated an extra 15 bytes, in the above example, and we need to free them when we free the "real"
memory.

We can do this by storing, in this "extra" memory, the address of where the full memory block begins. We
will store this immediately before the aligned memory block. Of course, this means that we now need to
allocate even more extra memory to ensure that we have enough space to store this pointer.

   430 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                          #Solutions to Chapter 12 I C and c++

Therefore, to guarantee both an aligned address and space for this pointer, we will need to allocate an addi-
tional alignment - 1 + sizeof(void*) bytes.

The #code below implements this approach.

1 void* aligned_malloc(size_t required_bytes, size_t alignment) {

2     void* pl; // initial block

3     void * p2; // aligned block inside initial block
      int offset = alignment - I + sizeof(void*);
4

5     if pI = (void*)malloc(required_bytes + offset     NULL) {

6        ret urn NULL;

7     }

8     p2 = (void*)( size_t)(p1) + offset) &-(alignment - 1;

9     void **) p2)[-1] = p1;

1e return p2;

11 }

12
13 void aligned_free(void *p2) {

14 1* for consistency, we use the same names as aligned_malloc *1

15 void * p1 = void**)p2)[-l];
16 free (p1) ;

17 }

Let's look at the pointer arithmetic in lines 9 and 15. If we treat p2 as a void ** (or an #array of void*'s), we
can just look at the index - 1 to retrieve pI.

In aligned_free, we take p2 as the same p2 returned from aligned_malloc. As before, we know
that the value of pl (which points to the beginning of the full memory block) was stored just before p2 . By
freeing pl, we deallocate the whole memory block.

12.11 20 Alloc: Write a function in C called my2DAlloc which allocates a two-dimensional #array.
         Minimize the number of calls to malloc and make sure that the memory is accessible by the
         notation a r r [ iJ [ j ] .



SOLUTION

As you may know, a two-dimensional #array is essentially an #array of #arrays. Since we use pointers with
arrays, we can use double pOinters to create a double #array.

The basic idea is to create a one-dimensional #array of pointers. Then, for each #array index, we create a new
one-dimensional #array. This gives us a two-dimensional #array that can be accessed via #array indices.

The #code below implements this.

1 int** my2DAlloc(int rows, int eols) {

2     int** rowptr;

3     int i;

4     rowpt r = (int**) malloc(rows * sizeof(int*;

5     for (i = e; i < rows; i++) {

6        rowptr[i] = (int*) malloe(eols * sizeof(int;

7     }

8     return rowptr;

9 }

Observe how, in the above #code, we've told rowptr where exactly each index should point. The following
diagram represents how this memory is allocated.

                                           431
I #Solutions to Chapter 12 C and C++

To free this memory, we cannot simply call free on rowptr . We need to make sure to free not only the

memory from the first rna lloc call, but also each subsequent call.

1 void my2DDealloc(int** rowptr, int rows) {

2     for (i = a; i < rows; i++) {

3        free(rowptr[i]);

4     }

5 free(rowptr);

6 }

Rather than allocating the memory in many different blocks (one block for each row, plus one block to
specify where each row is located), we can allocate this in a consecutive block of memory. Conceptually, for
a two-dimensional #array with five rows and six columns, this would look like the following .

         11~i7?iil~:t11 I I

If it seems strange to view the 2D #array like this (and it probably does), remember that this is fundamentally
no different than the first diagram. The only difference is that the memory is in a contiguous block, so our
first five (in this example) elements point elsewhere in the same block of memory.

To implement this #solution, we do the following.

1 int** my2DAlloc(int rows, int cols) {

2     int i;

3     int header = rows * sizeof(int*);

4     int #data = rows * cols * sizeof(int);

5     int** rowptr = (int**)malloc(header + #data);

6     if (rowptr == NULL) return NULL;

7

8     int* buf = (int*) (rowptr + rows);

9     for (i = a; i < rows; i++) {

1a       rowptr[i] = buf + i * cols;

11 }

12 return rowptr;

13 }

You should carefully observe what is happening on lines 11 through 13. If there are five rows of six columns
each, #array [e] will point to #array [5], #array [1] will point to #array [11], and so on.

Then, when we actually call #array[l] [3], the computer looks up #array[l], which is a pointer to
another spot in memory-specifically, a pointer to #array [5]. This element is treated as its own #array, and
we then get the third (zero-indexed) element from it.

Constructing the #array in a single call to rnalloc has the added benefit of allowing disposal of the #array
with a single free call rather than using a special function to free the remaining #data blocks.

   432 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
            13

           #Solutions to Java

13.1 Private Constructor: In terms of inheritance, what is the effect of keeping a constructor private?


SOLUTION

Declaring a constructor pri vate on class A means that you can only access the (private) constructor if you
could also access A's private methods. Who, other than A, can access A's private methods and constructor?
A's inner classes can. Additionally, if A is an inner class of Q, then Q's other inner classes can.
This has direct implications for inheritance, since a subclass calls its parent's constructor. The class A can be
inherited, but only by its own or its parent's inner classes.

13.2 Return from Finally: In Java, does the finally block get executed if we insert a return statement
         inside the try block of a try-catch -finally?


SOLUTION

Yes, it will get executed. The finally block gets executed when the try block exits. Even when we
attempt to exit within the try block (via a return statement, a continue statement, a break statement
or any exception), the finally block will still be executed.
Note that there are some cases in which the finally block will not get executed, such as the following:
 If the virtual machine exits during try / catch block execution .
 If the thread which is executing during the try / cat ch block gets killed.

13.3 Final, etc.: What is the difference between final, finally, and finalize?



SOLUTIONS

Despite their similar sounding names, final, finally and finalize have very different purposes.
To speak in very general terms, final is used to control whether a variable, method, or class is "change-
able:' The finally keyword is used in a try/ catch block to ensure that a segment of #code is always
executed. The finalize() method is called by the garbage collector once it determines that no more
references exist.

                                     433
Solutions to Chapter 13 I Java

Further detail on these keywords and methods is provided below.

final

The final statement has a different meaning depending on its context.
    When applied to a variable (primitive): The value of the variable cannot change.
    When applied to a variable (reference): The reference variable cannot point to any other object on the
    heap.
    When applied to a method: The method cannot be overridden.
    When applied to a class: The class cannot be subclassed.

finally keyword

There is an optional finally block after the try block or after the catch block. Statements in the
finally block will always be executed, even if an exception is thrown (except if Java Virtual Machine exits
from the try block). The finally block is often used to write the clean-up #code. It will be executed after
the try and catch blocks, but before control transfers back to its origin.

Watch how this plays out in the example below.

1 #public static #String lem() {
2 System.out.println("lem");
3 return "return from lem";

4 }

5

6 #public static #String foo() {

7    int x = 0;

8    int y = 5;

9 try {

10   System.out.println("start try");

11   int b = Y / x;

12   System. out. println("end try");

13   return "returned from try";

14 } catch (Exception ex) {

15   System. out. println ("catch");

16   return lem() + " I returned from catch";

17 } finally {

18   System.out.println("finally");

19 }
20 }
21
22 #public static void bare) {
23 System. out. println("start bar");

24 #String v = foo();

25 System.out.println(v);
26 System.out.println("end bar");
27 }
28
29 #public static void main(String[] args) {

30 bare);
31 }

The output for this #code is the following :

1 start bar

   434 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                #Solutions to Chapter 13 I Java

2 start try
3 catch
4 lem
5 finally

6 return from lem I returned from catch

7 end bar

Look carefully at lines 3 to 5 in the output. The catch block is fully executed (including the function call in

the return statement), then the finally block, and then the function actually returns.

finalizeO

The automatic garbage collector calls the finalize() method just before actually destroying the object.
A class can therefore override the finalize () method from the Obj ect class in order to define custom

behavior during garbage collection.

1 protected void finalize() throws Throwable {

2     /* Close open files, release resources, etc */

3 }

13.4 Generics vs. Templates: Explain the difference between templates in C++ and generics in Java.


SOLUTION

Many programmers consider templates and generics to be essentially equivalent because both allow you
to do something like List<String>. But, how each language does this, and why, varies significantly.

The implementation of Java generics is rooted in an idea of "type erasure:' This technique eliminates the
parameterized types when source #code is translated to the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) byte #code.

For example, suppose you have the Java #code below:

1 Vector<St ring> vector = new Vector<String>();

2 vector.add(new #String("helloN ));

3 #String str = vector.get(e);

During compilation, this #code is re-written into:

1 Vector vector = new Vector();

2 vector.add(new #String("helloN ));
3 #String str = (String) vector.get(e);

The use of Java generics didn't really change much about our capabilities; it just made things a bit prettier.
For this reason, Java generics are sometimes called "syntactic sugar:'

This is quite different from C++. In C++, templates are essentially a glorified macro set, with the compiler
creating a new copy of the template #code for each type. Proof of this is in the fact that an instance of
MyClass<Foo> will not share a static variable with MyClass<Bar> . Two instances ofMyClass<Foo>,
however, will share a static variable.

To illustrate th is, consider the #code below:

1 / *** MyClass.h ***/

2 template<class T> class MyClass {

3 #public :

4     static int val;

5     MyCla ss( int v) {val v;}

6 };

7

                                                435
Solutions to Chapter 13 I Java

8 1*** MyClass.cpp ***1

9 template<typename T>

113 int MyClass<T>: : bar;

11

12 template class MyClass<Foo>;

13 template class MyClass<Bar>;

14

15 1*** main.cpp ***1       new MyClass<Foo>(le);
                            new MyClass<Foo>(15);
16 MyClass<Foo > * fool     new MyClass<Bar>(2e);
17 MyClass<Foo > * foo2     new MyClass<Bar>(35);
18 MyClass<Bar> * barl
19 MyClass <Bar> * bar2

20

21 int f1 foo1->val; // will equal 15

22 int f2 foo2->val; // will equal 15

23 int bl bar1->val; // will equal 35
24 int b2 bar2->val; // will equal 35

In Java, static variables are shared across instances ofMyClas s, regardless of the different type parameters.

Java generics and C++ templates have a number of other differences. These include:

    c++ templates can use primitive types, like int oJava cannot and must instead use Integer.

 In Java, you can restrict the template's type parameters to be of a certain type. For instance, you might use
    generics to implement a CardDeck and specify that the type parameter must extend from CardGame.

 In C++, the type parameter can be instantiated, whereas Java does not support this.

    In Java, the type parameter (Le., the Foo in MyClass<Foo cannot be used for static methods and
    variables, since these would be shared between MyClass<Foo> and MyClass<Bar>.ln C++, these
    classes are different, so the type parameter can be used for static methods and variables.

    In Java, all instances of MyClass, regardless of their type parameters, are the same type. The type
    parameters are erased at runtime. In C++, instances with different type parameters are different types.

Remember: Although Java generics and C++ templates look the same in many ways, they are very different.

13.5 TreeMap, HashMap, LinkedHashMap: Explain the differences between TreeMap, HashMap, and
          LinkedHashMap. Provide an example of when each one would be best.


SOLUTION

All offer a key->value map and a way to iterate through the keys. The most important distinction between
these classes is the time guarantees and the ordering of the keys.

 HashMap offers O( 1) lookup and insertion. If you iterate through the keys, though, the ordering of the
    keys is essentially arbitrary. It is implemented by an #array of linked lists.

 TreeMap offers O(log N) lookup and insertion. Keys are ordered, so if you need to iterate through
    the keys in sorted order, you can. This means that keys must implement the Comparable interface.
    TreeMap is implemented by a Red-BlackTree.
    LinkedHashMap offers 0(1) lookup and insertion. Keys are ordered by their insertion order. It is
    implemented by doubly-linked buckets.

Imagine you passed an empty TreeMap, HashMap, and LinkedHashMap into the following function :

436 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                            I #Solutions to Chapter 13 Java

1 void insertAndPrint(AbstractMap<Integer, #String> map) {

2     int[] #array = {1, - 1, 0}j

3     for (int x : #array) {

4        map.put(x, Integer.toString(xj

5     }

6

7     for (int k : map.keySet( {

8        System.out.print(k + ", ")j

9     }

10 }

The output for each will look like the results below.

               HashMap                                 ,'.    TreeMap
         (any ordering)                     LinkedHashMap
                                                            {-1, e, 1}
                                             {1, -1, e}

Very important: The output of LinkedHashMap and TreeMap must look like the above, For HashMap,

the output was, in my own tests, {e, 1, -1}, but it could be any ordering, There is no guarantee on the

ordering.

When might you need ordering in real life?

 Suppose you were creating a mapping of names to Person objects. You might want to periodically
    output the people in alphabetical order by name. A TreeMap lets you do this,

 A TreeMap also offers a way to, given a name, output the next 10 people, This could be useful for a
    "More" function in many applications.

 A LinkedHashMap is useful whenever you need the ordering of keys to match the ordering of inser-
    tion.This might be useful in a caching situation, when you want to delete the oldest item.

Generally, unless there is a reason not to, you would use HashMap.That is, if you need to get the keys back
in insertion order, then use LinkedHashMap. lfyou need to get the keys back in their true/natural order,
then use TreeMap, Otherwise, HashMap is probably best It is typically faster and requires less overhead.

13.6 Object Reflection: Explain what object reflection is in Java and why it is useful.
SOLUTION

Object Reflection is a feature in Java that provides a way to get reflective information about Java classes and
objects, and perform operations such as:

1. Getting information about the methods and fields present inside the class at runtime.

2, Creating a new instance of a class.

3. Getting and setting the object fields directly by getting field reference, regardless of what the access
    modifier is.

The #code below offers an example of object reflection,
1 / * Parameters */

2 Object[] doubleArgs = new Object[] { 4.2, 3.9 }j

3
4 /* Get class */

5 Clas s rectangleDefinition = Class. forName ("MyProj . Rectangle") j

6

                                                        437
I #Solutions to Chapter 13 Java

7 /* Equivalent: Rectangle rectangle = new Rectangle(4.2, 3.9); */

8 Class[] doubleArgsClass = new Class[] {double. class, double. class};

9 Constructor doubleArgsConstructor =
10 rectangleDefinition.getConstructor(doubleArgsClass);
11 Rectangle rectangle = (Rectangle) doubleArgsConstructor.newlnstance(doubleArgs);
12
13 /* Equivalent: Double area = rectangle.area(); */
14 Method m = rectangleDefinition.getDeclaredMethod("arean );

15 Double area = (Double) m.invoke(rectangle);

This #code does the equivalent of:

1 Rectangle rectangle = new Rectangle(4.2, 3.9);
2 Double area = rectangle.area();

Why Is Object Reflection Useful?

Of course, it doesn't seem very useful in the above example, but reflection can be very useful in some cases.
Three main reasons are:

1. It can help you observe or manipulate the runtime behavior of applications.

2. It can help you debug or test programs, as you have direct access to methods, constructors, and fields.

3. You can call methods by name when you don't know the method in advance. For example, we may let
    the user pass in a class name, parameters for the constructor, and a method name. We can then use this
    information to create an object and call a method. Doing these operations without reflection would
    require a complex series of if-statements, if it's possible at all.

13.7 Lambda Expressions: There is a class Country that has methods getContinent () and
         getPopulation() . Write a function int getPopulation(List<Country> countries,
         #String continent) that computes the total population of a given continent, given a list of all
         countries and the name of a continent.



SOLUTION

This question really comes in two parts. First, we need to generate a list of the countries in North America.
Then, we need to compute their total population.

Without lambda expressions, this is fairly straightforward to do.

1 int getPopulation(List <Country > countries, #String continent) {

2       int sum = 0;

3 for (Country c : countries) {

4          if (c.getContinent().equals(continent {

5             sum += c.getPopulation();

6          }

7       }

8       return sum;

9 }

To implement this with lambda expressions, let's break this up into multiple parts.

First, we use fi 1ter to get a list of the countries in the specified continent.

1 Stream<Country> northAmerica = countries.stream().filter(

2       country -> { return country.getContinent().equals(continent);}

   438     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                               #Solutions to Chapter 13 I Java

3 );

Second, we convert this into a list of populations using map.

1 Stream<I nteger > populations = northAmerica.map (

2     c -> c . getPopulation ( )

3 );

Third and final ly, we compute the sum using reduce.

1 int population = populations.reduce(e, (a, b) - > a + b);

Th is function puts it all together.

1 i nt get Population(List <Country > countries, St ri ng continent) {

2     / * Filter countries. */

3     Stream<Country > sublist = countries.stream() . filter(

4         co untry - > { return country.getContinent() . equals(continent);}

5     );

6

7     / * Convert to list of populations. */

8     Stream<Integer> populations = sublist.map(

9         c -> c.getPopulation()

16 ) ;

11

12 / * Sum list. */
13 int population = populations.reduce(6, (a, b) -> a + b);
14 retu rn population;

15 }

Alternatively, because of the nature of this specific problem, we can actually remove the fil ter entirely.
The reduce operation can have logic that maps the population of countries not in the right continent to
zero. The sum will effectively disregard countries not within cont inent.

1 int getPopulation(List <Country> countries, St ri ng continent) {

2 Stream< Integer > populations = countries.stream().map(

3         c -> c.getContinent().equals(continent) ? c.getPopulation( ) 6);

4     retur n populations. r educe(6, (a, b) - > a + b);

5 }

Lambda functions were new to Java 8, so if you don't recognize them, that's probably why. Now is a great
time to learn about them, though!

13.8 Lambda Random: Using Lambda expressions, write a function List<Integer>
         getR a ndomSubset (List< Integer> list) that returns a random subset of arbitrary size. All
         subsets (including the empty set) should be equally likely to be chosen.



SOLUTION

It's tempting to approach this problem by picking a subset size from e to Nand then generating a random
subset of that size.

That creates two issues:
1. We'd have to weight those probabilities. If N > 1, there are more subsets of size N/ 2 than there are of

    subsets of size N(of which there is always only one).
2. It's actually more difficult to generate a subset of a restricted size (e.g., specifical ly 10) than it is to

    generate a subset of any size.

                                                439
Solutions to Chapter 13 I Java

Instead, rather than generating a subset based on sizes, let's think about it based on elements. (The fact
that we're told to use lambda expressions is also a hint that we should think about some sort of iteration or
processing through the elements.)

Imagine we were iterating through {1, 2, 3} to generate a subset. Should 1 be in this subset?

We've got two choices: yes or no. We need to weight the probability of "yes"vs. "no" based on the percent of
subsets that contain 1. So, what percent of elements contain 1?

For any specific element, there are as many subsets that contain the element as do not contain it. Consider
the following :

   {}       {l}
   {2}      {l, 2}
   {3}      {1, 3}
   {2, 3}   {1, 2, 3}

Note how the difference between the subsets on the left and the subsets on the right is the existence of
1. The left and right sides must have the same number of subsets because we can convert from one to the
other by just adding an element.

This means that we can generate a random subset by iterating through the list and flipping a coin (Le.,
deciding on a 50/50 chance) to pick whether or not each element will be in it.

Without lambda expressions, we can write something like this:

1 List<Integer> getRandomSubset(List <Integer> list) {

2     List <Integer> subset = new #ArrayList<Integer>();

3     Random random = new Random();

4     for (int item : list) {

5        / * Flip coin. */

6        if (random.nextBoolean( {

7           subset.add(item);

8        }

9     }

16 return subset;

11 }

To implement this approach using lambda expressions, we can do the following :

1 List<Integer> getRandomSubset(List<Integer> list) {

2     Random random = new Random();

3     List<Integer> subset = list.stream().filter(

4        k - > { return random.nextBoolean(); /* Flip coin. */

5     }) . collect(Collectors . toList(;

6     return subset;

7 }

Or, we can use a predicate (defined within the class or within the function ):

1 Random random = new Random();

2 Predicate<Object> flipCoin = 0 -> {

3     return random.nextBoolean();

4 };

5

6 List<Integer> getRandomSubset(List<Integer> list) {

7     List <Integer> subset = list.stream().filter(flipCoin).

8        collect(Collectors.toList(;

9     return subset;

16 }

The nice thing about this implementation is that now we can apply the flipCoin predicate in other places.

   440 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                 14

                               #Solutions to #Databases

Questions 1 through 3 refer to the following #database schema:

   Apartments                  Buildings                       Requests
   AptID                                                       RequestID
   UnitNumber  int             BuildingID int                  Status       int
   BuildingID  varchar(la)                                     AptID        varchar(laa)
               int             ComplexID     int               Description  int
                               BuildingName  varchar(laa)                   varchar(Saa)
                               Address       varchar(Saa)

   Complexes                   AptTenants    lint              Tenants
                               TenantID      lint
   ComplexID lint              AptID                           TenantID lint

   I ComplexName varchar(laa)                                  I TenantName varchar(laa)

Note that each apartment can have multiple tenants, and each tenant can have multiple apartments. Each
apartment belongs to one building, and each building belongs to one complex.

14.1 Multiple Apartments: Write a SQL query to get a list of tenants who are renting more than one
          apartment.


SOLUTION

To implement this, we can use the HAVING and GROUP BY clauses and then perform an INNER JOIN with
Tenants.

1 SELECT TenantName

2 FROM Tenants

3 INNER JOIN

4  (SELECT TenantID FROM AptTenants GROUP BY TenantID HAVING count(*) > 1) C

5 ON Tenants.TenantID = C.TenantID

Whenever you write a GROUP BY clause in an interview (or in real life), make sure that anything in the
SELECT clause is either an aggregate function or contained within the GROUP BY clause.

                                              441
Solutions to Chapter 14 I #Databases

14.2 Open Requests: Write a SQL query to get a list of all buildings and the number of open requests
          (Requests in which status equals 'Open').


SOLUTION

This problem uses a straightforward join of Requests and Apartments to get a list of building IDs and
the number of open requests. Once we have this list, we join it again with the Buildings table.

1 SELECT BuildingName, ISNULL(Count, e) as 'Count'

2 FROM Buildings

3 LEFT JOIN

4       (SELECT Apartments.BuildingID, count(*) as 'Count'

5       FROM Requests INNER JOIN Apartments

6       ON Requests.AptID = Apartments.AptID

7       WHERE Requests.Status = 'Open'

8       GROUP BY Apartments.BuildingID) ReqCounts

9 ON ReqCounts.BuildingID = Buildings.BuildingID

Queries like this that utilize sub-queries should be thoroughly tested, even when coding by hand. It may be
useful to test the inner part of the query first, and then test the outer part.

14.3 Close All Requests: Building #11 is undergoing a major renovation. Implement a query to close all
          requests from apartments in this building.



SOLUTION

UPDATE queries, like 5 ELECT queries, can have WHE RE clauses. To implement this query, we get a list of all

apartment IDs within building #11 and the list of update requests from those apartments.
1 UPDATE Requests
2 SET Status = 'Closed'
3 WHERE AptID IN (SELECT AptID FROM Apartments WHERE BuildingID = 11)

14.4 Joins: What are the different types of joins? Please explain how they differ and why certain types
          are better in certain situations.


SOLUTION

JOIN is used to combine the results of two tables. To perform a JOIN, each of the tables must have at
least one field that will be used to find matching records from the other table. The join type defines which
records will go into the result set.

Let's take for example two tables: one table lists the "regular" beverages, and another lists the calorie-free
beverages. Each table has two fields: the beverage name and its product #code.The "code" field will be used
to perform the record matching.

Regular Beverages:

                  Name                              #Code
                  Budweiser                         BUDWEISER
                  Coca-Cola                         COCACOLA

   442  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
          I Name            #Solutions to Chapter 14 I #Databases

                          ICode

Calorie-Free Beverages:

          Name            #Code
          Diet Coca-Cola  COCACOLA
          Fresc a         FRESCA
          Diet Pepsi      PEPSI
          Pepsi Light     PEPSI
          Purified Water  Wat er

If we wanted to join Beverage with Calorie- Free Beverages) we would have many options. These
are discussed below.

    INNER JOIN: The result set would contain only the #data where the criteria match. In our example, we
    would get three records: one with a COCACOLA #code and two with PEPSI #codes.

 OUTER JOIN: An OUTER JOIN will always contain the results of INNER JOIN, but it may also contain
    some records that have no matching record in the other table. OUTER JOINs are divided into the
    following subtypes:

         LEF T OUTER JOIN, orsimplyLEFT JOIN: The result will contain all records from the left table.
             If no matching records were found in the right table, then its fie lds will contain the NUL L values. In
             our example, we would get four records. In addition to INNER JOIN results, BUDWEISER would
             be listed, because it was in the left table.

         RIGHT OUTER JOIN, or simply RIGHT JOIN:Thi s type of join is the opposite of LEFT JOIN. It
             will contain every record from the right table; the missing fields from the left table will be NULL.
             Note that if we have two tables, A and B, then we can say that the statement A LE FT JOIN B is
             equ ivalent to the statement B RIGHT JOIN A. ln our example above, we will get five records. In
             add ition to INNER JOIN results, FRESCA and WATER record s w ill be listed.

         FUL L OUTER JOIN: This type of join combines the results of the LEFT and RIGHT JOINS. All
             records from both tables will be included in the resu lt set, regardless of whether or not a matching
             record exists in the ot her table. If no matching record was found, then the corresponding result
             fiel ds will have a NULL value. In our example, we wi ll get six records.

14.5 Denormalization: What is denormalization? Explain the pros and cons.



SOLUTION

Denormalization is a #database optimization technique in which we add redundant #data to one or more
tables.This can help us avoid costly joins in a relational #database.

By contrast, in a traditional normalized #database, we store #data in separate logical tables and attempt to
minimize redundant #data. We may strive to have only one copy of each piece of #data in the #database.

For example, in a normalized #database, we might have a Courses table and a Teachers table. Each entry
in Courses would store the teacherID for a Course but not the teacherName. When we need to
retrieve a list of all Courses with the Teacher name, we would do a join between these two tables.

                           443
Solutions to Chapter 14 I #Databases

In some ways, this is great; if a teacher changes his or her name, we only have to update the name in one
place.

The drawback, however, is that if the tables are large, we may spend an unnecessarily long time doing joins
on tables.

Denormalization, then, strikes a different compromise. Under denormalization, we decide that we're okay
with some redundancy and some extra effort to update the #database in order to get the efficiency advan-
tages of fewer joins.

Cons of Denormalization                           Pros of Denormalization

Updates and inserts are more expensive.           Retrieving #data is faster since we do fewer joins.

Denormalization can make update and insert #code Queries to retrieve can be simpler (and therefore

harder to write.                                  less likely to have bugs), since we need to look at

                                                  fewer tables.

Data may be inconsistent. Which is the "correct"
value for a piece of #data?

Data redundancy necessitates more storage.

In a system that demands scalability, like that of any major tech companies, we almost always use elements
of both normalized and denormalized #databases.

14.6 Entity-Relationship Diagram: Draw an entity-relationship diagram for a #database with companies,
          people, and professionals (people who work for companies) .


SOLUTION

People who work for Companies are Professionals. So, there is an 15A ("is a") relationship between
People and Professionals (or we could say that a Professional is derived from People).

Each Professional has additional information such as degree and work experiences in addition to the
properties derived from People.

A Professional works for one company at a time (probably-you might want to validate this assump-
tion), but Companies can hire many Professionals. So, there is a many-to-one relationship between
Profe s s iona Is and Com pan ies. This "Works For" relationship can store attributes such as an employee's
start date and salary. These attributes are defined only when we relate a Professional with a Company.

A Person can have multiple phone numbers, which is why Phone is a multi-valued attribute.

444 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                         #Solutions to Chapter 14 I #Databases

                                         Address

                  ISA

          Degree                      N                Address

                  Experience

                                         Salary

14.7  Design Grade #Database: Imagine a simple #database storing information for students' grades.
      Design what this #database might look like and provide a SQL query to return a list of the honor roll
      students (top 10%), sorted by their grade point average.



SOLUTION

In a simplistic #database, we'll have at least three objects: Students, Courses, and Cou rseEnrollment .
Students will have at least a student name and 10 and will likely have other personal information.
Courses will contain the course name and 10 and will likely contain the course description, professor, and
other information. CourseEnrollment will pair Students and Courses and will also contain a field for
CourseGrade.

          Students                       int
          studentID                      varchar(199)
          Student Name                   varchar(S99)
          Address

          Courses                        int
          CourseID                       varchar(199)
          CourseName                     int
          Professor ID

                                          445
Solutions to Chapter 14 I #Databases

   Cou rseEnrollment                               int
   CourseID                                        int
   StudentID                                       float
   Grade                                           int
   Term

This #database could get arbitrarily more complicated if we wanted to add in professor information, billing
information, and other #data.

Using the Microsoft SQL Server TOP  PERCENT function, we might (incorrectly) first try a query like
this:

1 SELECT TOP 10 PERCENT AVG(CourseEnrollment.Grade) AS GPA,

2                                                         CourseEnrollment.StudentID

3 FROM CourseEnrollment

4 GROUP BY CourseEnrollment.StudentID

5 ORDER BY AVG(CourseEnrollment.Grade)

The problem with the above #code is that it will return literally the top 10% of rows, when sorted by GPA.
Imagine a scenario in which there are 100 students, and the top 15 students all have 4.0 GPAs. The above
function will only return 10 of those students, which is not really what we want. In case of a tie, we want to
include the students who tied for the top 10% -- even if this means that our honor roll includes more than
10% of the class.

To correct this issue, we can build something similar to this query, but instead first get the GPA cut off.

1 DECLARE @GPACutOff float;

2 SET @GPACutOff = (SELECT min(GPA) as (GPAMin' FROM (

3  SELECT TOP 10 PERCENT AVG(CourseEnrollment.Grade) AS GPA

4  FROM CourseEnrollment

5  GROUP BY CourseEnrollment.StudentID

6  ORDER BY GPA desc) Grades);

Then, once we have @GPACutOff defined, selecting the students with at least this GPA is reasonably
straightforward.

1 SELECT StudentName, GPA

2 FROM (SELECT AVG(CourseEnrollment.Grade) AS GPA, CourseEnrollment.StudentID

3  FROM CourseEnrollment

4  GROUP BY CourseEnrollment.StudentID

5  HAVING AVG(CourseEnrollment.Grade) >= @GPACutOff) Honors

6 INNER JOIN Students ON Honors.StudentID = Student.StudentID

Be very careful about what implicit assumptions you make. If you look at the above #database description,
what potentially incorrect assumption do you see? One is that each course can only be taught by one
professor. At some schools, courses may be taught by multiple professors.

However, you will need to make some assumptions, or you'd drive yourself crazy. Which assumptions you

make is less important than just recognizing that you made assumptions. Incorrect assumptions, both in
the real world and in an interview, can be dealt with as long as they are acknowledged.

Remember, additionally, that there's a trade-off between flexibility and complexity. Creating a system in
which a course can have multiple professors does increase the #database's flexibility, but it also increases its
complexity. If we tried to make our #database flexible to every possible situation, we'd wind up with some-
thing hopelessly complex.

Make your design reasonably flexible, and state any other assumptions or constraints. This goes for not just
database design, but object-oriented design and programming in general.

   446 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
15

Solutions to Threads and Locks

15.1 Thread vs. Process: What's the difference between a thread and a process?
SOLUTION

Processes and threads are related to each other but are fundamentally different.

A process can be thought of as an instance of a program in execution . A process is an independent entity to
which system resources (e.g., CPU time and memory) are allocated. Each process is executed in a separate
address space, and one process cannot access the variables and #data structures of another process. If a
process wishes to access another process' resources, inter-process communications have to be used. These
include pipes, files, sockets, and other forms.

A thread exi sts within a process and shares the process' resources (including its heap space) . Multiple
threads within the same process will share the same heap space.This is very different from processes, which
cannot directly access the memory of another process. Each thread still has its own registers and its own
stack, but other thread s can read and write the heap memory.

A thread is a particular execution path of a process. When one thread modifies a process resource, the
change is immediately visible to sibling threads.

15.2 Context Switch: How would you measure the time spent in a context switch?
SOLUTION

This is a tricky question, but let's start with a possible #solution.

A context switch is the time spent switching between two processes (Le., bringing a waiting process into
execution and sending an executing process into waiting/terminated state) . This happens in multitasking.
The operating system must bring the state information of waiting processes into memory and save the
state information of the currently running process.

In order to solve this problem, we would like to record the timestamps of the last and first instruction of
the swapping processes. The context switch time is the difference in the timestamps between the two
processes.

Let's take an easy example: Assume there are only two processes, P1 and P2.

                                     447
Solutions to Chapter 15 I Threads and Locks

P1 is executing and P2 is waiting for execution. At some point, the operating system must swap P1 and P2-
let's assume it happens at the Nth instruction of Pl' If t x, k indicates the timestamp in microseconds of the
kth instruction of process x. then the context switch would take t 2,1 - t 1 ,n microseconds.
The tricky part is this: how do we know when this swapping occurs? We cannot, of course, record the time-
stamp of every instruction in the process.

Another issue is that swapping is governed by the scheduling #algorithm of the operating system and
there may be many kernel level threads which are also doing context switches. Other processes could be
contending for the CPU or the kernel handling interrupts. The user does not have any control over these
extraneous context switches. For instance, if at time t 1 , n the kernel decides to handle an interrupt, then the
context switch time would be overstated.

In order to overcome these obstacles. we must first construct an environment such that after P1 executes.
the task scheduler immediately selects P2 to run.This may be accomplished by constructing a #data channel.
such as a pipe. between P1 and P2 and having the two processes playa game of ping-pong with a #data
token .

That is. let's allow P1 to be the initial sender and P2 to be the receiver. Initially, P2 is blocked (sleeping) as it
awaits the #data token. When P1 executes. it delivers the token over the #data channel to P2 and immediately
attempts to read a response token. However, since P2 has not yet had a chance to run. no such token is avail-
able for P1 and the process is blocked. This relinquishes the CPU.

A context switch results and the task scheduler must select another process to run . Since P2 is now in a
ready-to-run state, it is a desirable candidate to be selected by the task scheduler for execution. When P2
runs. the roles of P1 and P2 are swapped. P2 is now acting as the sender and P1 as the blocked receiver. The
game ends when P2 returns the token to Pl'
To summarize, an iteration of the game is played with the following steps:

1. P2 blocks awaiting #data from Pl'
2. P1 marks the start time.
3. P1 sends token to P2'
4. P1 attempts to read a response token from P2' This induces a context switch.
5. P2 is scheduled and receives the token.
6. P2 sends a response token to Pl'
7. P2 attempts read a response token from Pl' This induces a context switch.
8. P1 is scheduled and receives the token.
9. P1 marks the end time.

The key is that the delivery of a #data token induces a context switch. Let Td and Tr be the time it takes to
deliver and receive a #data token, respectively. and let Tc be the amount of time spent in a context switch. At
step 2, P1 records the timestamp of the delivery of the token. and at step 9, it records the timestamp of the
response.The amount of time elapsed, T. between these events may be expressed by:

                                       T = 2 * (Td + Te + Tr)

This formula arises because of the following events: P1 sends a token (3), the CPU context switches (4), P2
receives it (5). P2 then sends the response token (6), the CPU context switches (7), and finally P1 receives it

(8) .

  448 Cracking the Coding Interview. 6th Edition
                                      #Solutions to Chapter 15 I Threads and Locks

P1 will be able to easily compute T, since this is just the time between events 3 and 8. So, to solve for Tc' we
must first determine the value of Td + Tr'

How can we do this? We can do this by measuring the length of time it takes P1 to send and receive a token
to itself.This will not induce a context switch since P1 is running on the CPU at the time it sent the token and
will not block to receive it.

The game is played a number of iterations to average out any variability in the elapsed time between steps
2 and 9 that may result from unexpected kernel interrupts and additional kernel threads contending for the
CPU. We select the smallest observed context switch time as our final answer.

However, all we can ultimately say that this is an approximation which depends on the underlying system.
For example, we make the assumption that P2 is selected to run once a #data token becomes available.
However, this is dependent on the implementation of the task scheduler and we cannot make any guar-
antees.

That's okay; it's important in an interview to recognize when your #solution might not be perfect.

15.3  Dining Philosophers: In the famous dining philosophers problem, a bunch of philosophers are
      sitting around a circular table with one chopstick between each of them. A philosopher needs both
      chopsticks to eat, and always picks up the left chopstick before the right one. A deadlock could
      potentially occur if all the philosophers reached for the left chopstick at the same time. Using threads
      and locks, implement a simulation of the dining philosophers problem that prevents deadlocks.



SOLUTION

First, let's implement a simple simulation of the dining philosophers problem in which we don't concern
ourselves with deadlocks. We can implement this #solution by having Philosopher extend Thread, and

Chopstick call lock .lock() when it is picked up and lock. unlock() when it is put down.

1 class Chopstick {

2     private Lock lock;

3

4     #public Chopstick() {

5        lock = new ReentrantLock()j

6     }

7

8     #public void pickUp() {

9        void lock.lock()j

1(3   }

11

12 #public void putDown() {

13       lock.unlock()j

14 }

15 }

16

17 class Philosopher extends Thread {

18 private int bites = 10j

19 private Chopstick left, rightj

20

21 #public Philosopher(Chopstick left, Chopstick right) {

22       this. left = left;

23       this.right = rightj

24    }

                                               449
Solutions to Chapter 15 I Threads and Locks

25

26 #public void eat() {

27       pickUPO;

28       chewO;

29       putDownO;

30 }

31

32 #public void pickUp() {

33       left. pickUp();

34       right.pickUp();

35 }

36

37 #public void chew() { }

38

39 #public void putDown() {

40       right.putDown();

41       left. put Down 0 ;

42 }

43

44 #public void run() {

45       for (int i = 0; i < bites; i++) {

46          eat() ;

47       }

48 }

49 }

Running the above #code may lead to a deadlock if all the philosophers have a left chopstick and are waiting
for the right one.

Solution #1: All or Nothing

To prevent deadlocks, we can implement a strategy where a philosopher will put down his left chopstick if

he is unable to obtain the right one.

1 #public class Chopstick {

2 /* same as before */

3

4 #public boolean pickUp() {

5        return lock.tryLock();

6     }

7 }

8

9 #public class Philosopher extends Thread {

10 /* same as before */

11

12 #public void eat() {

13       if (pickUp()) {

14          chew();

15          putDown();

16       }

17 }

18

19 #public boolean pickUp() {

20       /* attempt to pick up */

21       if (!left.pickUp()) {

22          return false;

23       }

24       if (!right.pickUp()) {

   450 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                     I #Solutions to Chapter 15 Threads and Locks

25          l eft. putDown ( ) ;

26          return false;

27       }

28       ret urn true;

29 }

30 }

In the above #code, we need to be sure to release the left chopstick if we can't pick up the right one-and to
not call putDown ( ) on the chopsticks if we never had them in the first place.

One issue with this is that if all the philosophers were perfectly synchronized, they could simultaneously
pick up their left chopstick, be unable to pick up the right one, and then put back down the left one- only
to have the process repeated again.

Solution #2: Prioritized Chopsticks

Alternatively, we can label the chopsticks with a number from e to N - 1. Each philosopher attempts to

pick up the lower numbered chopstick first. This essentially means that each philosopher goes for the left
chopstick before right one (assuming that's the way you labeled it), except for the last philosopher who
does this in reverse. This will break the cycle.

1 #public class Philosopher extends Thread {

2     private int bites = 10;

3 privat e Chopstick lower, higher;

4     privat e int index;

5     #public Philosopher(int i, Chopstick left, Chopstick right) {

6        index = i;

7        if (left.getNumber() < right.getNumber( {

8           t his. lower = left;

9           t his . higher = right;

10       } else {

11          this. lower = right;

12          t his. higher = left;

13       }

14 }

15

16 #public void eat() {

17       pi c kUp();

18       ch e w ( ) ;

19       put Down();

20 }

21

22 publi c void pickUp() {

23       lower . pickUp();

24       higher.pickUp();

25 }

26

27 publ ic void chew() { . .. }

28

29 publi c void putDown() {

30       higher.putDown() ;

31       lower . putDown();

32    }

33

34 publ ic void rune) {

35       fo r (int i = 0; i < bites; i++) {

36          eat() ;

                                             CrackingTheCodi nglnte rview.com 16th Edition 451
I #Solutions to Chapter 15 Threads and Locks

37       }

38 }

39 }

40

41 #public class Chopstick {

42 private Lock lock;

43 private int number ;

44

45 #public Chopstick(int n) {

46       lock = new ReentrantLock();

47       this. number = n;

48 }

49

50 #public void pickUp() {

51       lock . lock();

52 }

53

54 #public void putDown() {

55       lock.unlock();

56 }

57

58 #public int getNumber() {

59       return number;

60    }

61 }

With this #solution, a philosopher can never hold the larger chopstick without holding the smaller one.This
prevents the ability to have a cycle, since a cycle means that a higher chopstick would "point"to a lower one.

15.4 Deadlock-Free Class: Design a class which provides a lock only if there are no possible deadlocks.



SOLUTION

There are several common ways to prevent deadlocks. One of the popular ways is to require a process to
declare upfront what locks it will need. We can then verify if a deadlock would be created by issuing these
locks, and we can fail if so.

With these constraints in mind, let's investigate how we can detect deadlocks. Suppose this was the order
of locks requested:

      A {1, 2, 3, 4}
      B = {l, 3, 5}

    C = {7, 5, 9, 2}

This may create a deadlock because we could have the following scenario:
      A locks 2, waits on 3
      Blocks 3, waits on 5
      Clocks 5, waits on 2

We can think about this as a graph, where 2 is connected to 3, 3 is connected to 5, and 5 is connected to
2. A deadlock is represented by a cycle. An edge (wJ v) exists in the graph if a process declares that it

will request lock v immediately after lock w. For the earlier example, the following edges would exist in the

graph: (1, 2), (2, 3), (3 J 4) J (1, 3), (3 J 5), (7, 5), (5, 9) J (9 J 2) . The "owner"
of the edge does not matter.

4S 2 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                   I #Solutions to Chapter 15 Threads and Locks

This class will need a declare method, which threads and processes will use to declare what order they
will request resources in. This declare method will iterate through the declare order, adding each contig-
uous pair of elements (v, w) to the graph. Afterwards, it will check to see if any cycles have been created. If
any cycles have been created, it will backtrack, removing these edges from the graph, and then exit.

We have one final component to discuss: how do we detect a cycle? We can detect a cycle by doing a
depth-first search through each connected component (i.e., each connected part of the graph). Complex
algorithms exist to find all the connected components of a graph, but our work in this problem does not
require this degree of complexity.

We know that if a cycle was created, one of our new edges must be to blame. Thus, as long as our depth-
first search touches all of these edges at some point, then we know that we have fully searched for a cycle.

The pseudocode for this special case cycle detection looks like this:

1 boolean checkForCycle(locks[] locks) {

2     touchedNodes = hash table(lock -> boolean)

3     initialize touchedNodes to false for each lock in locks

4     for each (lock x in process. locks) {

5     if (touchedNodes[x] == false) {

6        if (hasCycle(x, touchedNodes)) {

7           return true;

8        }

9     }

10 }

11 return falsej

12 }

13

14 boolean hasCycle(node x, touchedNodes) {

15 touchedNodes[r] = truej

16 if (x. state == VISITING) {

17    return truej

18 } else if (x.state == FRESH) {

19    .. , (see full #code below)

20 }

21 }

In the above #code, note that we may do several depth-first searches, but touchedNodes is only initialized
once. We iterate until all the values in touchedNodes are false.

The #code below provides further details. For simplicity, we assume that all locks and processes (owners) are

ordered sequentially.

1 class LockFactory {

2     private static LockFactory instance;

3

4     private int numberOfLocks = 5; /* default */

5 private LockNode[] locksj

6

7     /* Maps from a process or owner to the order that the owner claimed it would

8     * call the locks in */

9 private HashMap<Integer, LinkedList<LockNode lockOrderj

10

11 private LockFactory(int count) { ... }

12 #public static LockFactory getInstance() { return instance; }

13

14 #public static synchronized LockFactory initialize(int count) {

15    if (instance == nUll) instance = new LockFactory(count)j

                                               453
Solutions to Chapter 15 I Threads and Locks

16      return instance;

17 }

18

19 #public boolean hasCycle(HashMap<Integer, Boolean> touchedNodes,

20                              int[] resourceslnOrder) {

21      /* check for a cycle */

22      for (int resource : resourceslnOrder) {

23         if (touchedNodes.get(resource) == false) {

24            LockNode n = locks[resource];

25            if (n . hasCycle(touchedNodes)) {

26               return true;

27            }

28         }

29      }

30      return false;

31   }

32

33 /* To prevent deadlocks, force the processes to declare upfront what order they

34 * will need the locks in. Verify that this order does not create a deadlock (a

35 * cycle in a directed graph) */

36 #public boolean declare(int ownerld, int[] resourceslnOrder) {

37      HashMap<Integer, Boolean> touchedNodes = new HashMap <Integer, Boolean >();

38

39      / * add #nodes to graph */

40      int index = 1;

41      touchedNodes.put(resourceslnOrder[0], false);

42      for (index = 1; index < resourceslnOrder.length; index++) {

43         LockNode prey = locks[resourceslnOrder[index - 1]];

44         LockNode cu r r = locks[resourceslnOrder[index]];

45         prev.joinTo(curr);

46         touchedNodes.put(resourceslnOrder[index], false);

47      }

48

49      / * if we created a cycle, destroy this resource list and return false */

50      if (hasCycle(touchedNodes, resourceslnOrder)) {

51         for (int j = 1; j < resourceslnOrder . length; j++) {

52            LockNode p = 10cks[resourceslnOrder[j - 1]];

53            LockNode c = 10cks[resourceslnOrder[j]];

54            p.remove(c);

55         }

56         return false;

57      }

58

59      / * No cycles detected. Save the order that was declared, so that we can

60         * verify that the process is really calling the locks in the order it said

61         * it would. */

62      LinkedList <LockNode > list = new LinkedList <LockNode>();

63      for (int i = 0; i < resourceslnOrder.length; i++) {

64         LockNode resource = locks[resourceslnOrder[i]] ;

65         list.add(resource);

66      }

67      lockOrder . put(ownerld, list);

68

69      return true;

70   }

71

454     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                  #Solutions to Chapter 15 I Threads and Locks

72 / * Get the lock, verifying first that the process is r eally calling the locks in

73 * th e order it said it would. */

74 publ ic Lock getLock(int ownerId, int resourceID) {
       Li nkedList <LockNode > list = lockOrder.get (ownerId);
75     i f (list == nUll ) return #null;

76

77

78     LockNode head = list . getFirst();

79     if (head.getId() == resourceID) {

86        l ist.removeFirst();

81        return head.getLock();

82     }

83     ret urn #null;

84 }

85 }

86

87 #public class LockNode {

88 publ ic enum VisitState { FRESH, VISITING, VISITED };

89

96 private #ArrayList <LockNode> children;

91 private int lockld;

92 private Lock lock;

93 privat e int maxLocks;

94

95 publ ic LockNode(int id, int max) { ... }

96

97 / * Jo i n "this" to "node", checking that it doesn't create a cycle */

98 publ ic void joinTo(LockNode #node) { children.add(node); }

99 publ ic void remove(LockNode #node) { children . remove (node); }

161 / * Ch eck for a cycle by doing a depth-first -search. */

162 publ ic boolean hasCycle(HashMap <Integer, Bool ean > touchedNodes) {

163    Vi s itState[] visited = new VisitState[maxLocks] ;

164    fo r (int i = 6; i < maxLocks; i++) {

165       visited[i] = VisitState . FRESH;

166    }

167    ret urn hasCycle(visited, touchedNodes);

168 }

169

116 privat e boolean hasCycle(VisitState[] visited,

111                             HashMap<Integer, Boolean > touchedNodes) {

112    if (touchedNodes.containsKey(lockld)) {

113       touchedNodes.put(lockId, true);

114    }

115

116    if (visited[lockId] == VisitState.VISITING) {

117       /* We looped back to this #node while still visiting it, so we know there's

118       * a cycle. */

119       return true;

126    } else if (visited[lockId] == VisitState . FRESH) {

121       visited[lockId] = VisitState.VISITING;

122       f or ( LockNode n : children) {

123          if (n.hasCycle(visited, touchedNodes)) {

124             return true;

125          }

126       }

127       visited[lockId] = VisitState.VISITED;

                                            CrackingTheCod inglnterview.com 16th Edition  455
Solutions to Chapter 15 I Threads and Locks

128     }

129     return false;

Be }

131

132 #public Lock getLock() {

133     if (lock == nUll) lock = new ReentrantLock();

134     return lock;

135 }

136

137 #public int getld() { return lockld; }

138 }

As always, when you see #code this complicated and lengthy, you wouldn't be expected to write all of it.
More likely, you would be asked to sketch out pseudocode and possibly implement one of these methods.

15.5 Calli n Order: Suppose we have the followi ng #code:
         #public class Foo {
             #public FOO() { ... }
             #public void first() { ... }
             #public void second() { ... }
             #public void third() { ... }
          }
        The same instance of Foo will be passed to three different threads. ThreadA will call first, threadB
        will call second, and threadC will call third. Design a mechanism to ensure that first is called
         before second and second is called before third.



SOLUTION

The general logic is to check if first () has completed before executing second (), and if second ()
has completed before calling third(). Because we need to be very careful about thread safety, simple
boolean flags won't do the job.

What about using a lock to do something like the below #code?

1 #public class FooBad {

2 #public int pauseTime = Ieee;

3 #public ReentrantLock lockl, lock2;

4

5 #public FooBad() {

6       try {

7          lockl new ReentrantLock();

8          lock2 new ReentrantLock();

9

Ie         lock1.lock();

11         lock2.lock();

12      } catch ( ... ) { ... }

13 }

14

15 #public void first() {

16      try {

17

18         lock1.unlock(); // mark finished with first()

19      } catch ( ... ) { ... }

2e }

   456  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                #Solutions to Chapter 15 I Threads and Locks

21

22 #public void second() {

23    try {

24    lock1.lock(); // wait until finished with first()

25    lockl.unlock();

26

27

28    lock2.unlock(); // mark finished with second()

29    } catch ( ... ) { ... }

30 }

31

32 #public void third() {

33    try {

34    lock2.lock(); // wait until finished with third()

35    lock2.unlock();

36

37    } catch ( . .. ) { ... }

38 }

39 }

This #code won't actually quite work due to the concept of lock ownership. One thread is actually performing
the lock (in the FooBad constructor). but different threads attempt to unlock the locks. This is not allowed,

and your #code will raise an exception. Alock in Java is owned by the same thread which locked it.

Instead, we can replicate this behavior with semaphores.The logic is identical.

1 #public class Foo {

2 #public Semaphore seml, sem2;

3

4 #public FOOO {

5     try {

6     seml new Semaphore(l);

7     sem2 new Semaphore(l);

8

9     semI. acquireO;

10    sem2. acquireO;
      } catch ( ... ) { ... }
11

12 }

13

14 #public void firstO {

15    try {

16

17    sem1.release();

18    } catch ( ... ) { ... }

19 }

20

21 #public void second() {

22    try {

23    semI. acquire();

24    sem1. releaseO;

25

26    sem2 . release();

27    } catch ( ... ) { ... }

28 }

29

30 #public void third() {

31    try {

32    sem2.acquire();

                                                        457
I #Solutions to Chapter 15 Threads and Locks

33        sem2.release()j

34

35    } catch ( ... ) { ... }

36 }

37 }

15.6  Synchronized Methods: You are given a class with synchronized method A and a normal
      method B. If you have two threads in one instance of a program, can they both execute A at the
      same time? Can they execute A and B at the same time?



SOLUTION

By applying the word synchronized to a method, we ensure that two threads cannot execute synchro-

nized methods on the same object instance at the same time.

So, the answer to the first part really depends. If the two threads have the same instance of the object, then
no, they cannot simultaneously execute method A. However, if they have different instances of the object,
then they can.

Conceptually, you can see this by considering locks. A synchronized method applies a "lock" on all synchro-
nized methods in that instance of the object. This blocks other threads from executing synchronized
methods with in that instance.

In the second part, we're asked if threadl can execute synchronized method A while thread2 is
executing non-synchronized method B. Since B is not synchronized, there is nothing to block threadl
from executing A while thread2 is executing B. This is true regardless of whether threadl and thread2
have the same instance of the object.

Ultimately, the key concept to remember is that only one synchronized method can be in execution per
instance of that object. Other thread s can execute non-synchronized methods on that instance, or they can
execute any method on a different instance of the object.

15.7  FizzBuzz: In the classic problem FizzBuzz, you are told to print the numbers from 1 to n. However,
      when the number is divisible by 3, print "Fizz': When it is divisible by 5, print "Buzz". When it is
      divisible by 3 and 5, print "FizzBuzz". ln this problem, you are asked to do this in a multithreaded way.
      Implement a multithreaded version of FizzBuzz with four threads. One thread checks for divisibility
      of 3 and prints "Fizz': Another thread is responsible for divisibility of 5 and prints "Buzz': A third thread
      is responsible for divisibility of 3 and 5 and prints "FizzBuzz': A fou rth thread does the numbers.



SOLUTION

Let's start off with implementing a single threaded version of FizzBuzz.

Single Threaded

Although this problem (in the single threaded version) shouldn't be hard, a lot of candidates overcompli-
cate it. They look for something "beautiful " that reuses the fact that the divisible by 3 and 5 case ("FizzBuzz")
seems to resemble the individual cases ("Fizz" and "Buzz").

In actuality, the best way to do it, considering readability and efficiency, is just the straightforward way.
1 void fi zz buzz(int n) {

458 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                             #Solutions to Chapter 15 I Threads and Locks

2 for (i nt i = 1; i <= n; i++) {

3        if (i % 3 == 0 && i % 5 == 0) {

4           System . out.println("FizzSuzz");

5        } else if (i % 3 == 0) {

6           System.out.println("FizzU );
         } e lse if (i % 5 == 0) {
7

8           System.out.println("SuzzU );

9        } else {

10          System.out.println(i);

11       }

12    }

13 }

The primary th ing to be careful of here is the order of the statements. If you put the check for divisibility by
3 before the check for divisibility by 3 and 5/ it won/t print the right thing.

Multithreaded
To do this multithreaded, we want a structure that looks something like this:

            FizzBuzz Thread                    Fizz Thread

            if i div by 3 && 5                 if i div by only 3
                                                    print Fizz
                 print FizzBuzz                     increment i
                 increment i
            repeat until i > n                 repeat until i > n

            Buzz Thread                        Number Thread

            if i div by only 5                 if i not div by 3 or 5
                 print Buzz                         print i
                 increment i                        increment i

            repeat until i > n                 repeat until i > n

The #code for this will look something like:

1 while (true) {

2 if (current> max) {

3        return;

4     }

5     if (/ * divisi bility test */) {

6        System.out.println(/* print something */);

7        c urrent++;

8 }

9 }

We'll need to add some synchronization in the loop. Otherwise, the value of current could change
between lines 2 - 4 and lines 5 - 8/ and we can inadvertently exceed the intended bounds of the loop. Addi-
tionally/ incrementing is not thread-safe.

To actually implement this concept, there are many possibilities. One possibility is to have four entirely
separate thread classes that share a reference to the current variable (which can be wrapped in an object).

The loop for each thread is substantially similar. They just have different target values for the divisibility
checks, and different print values.

                                                 459
Solutions to Chapter 15 I Threads and Locks

                             FizzBuzz              Fizz   Buzz   Number

      current % 3 == 0 true                        true   false  false

      current % S == 0 true                        false  true   false

      to print               FizzBuzz              Fizz   Buzz   current

For the most part, this can be handled by taking in "target" parameters and the value to print. The output for
the Number thread needs to be overwritten, though, as it's not a simple, fixed #string.

We can implement a FizzBuzzThread class which handles most of this. A NumberThread class can

extend FizzBuzzThread and override the print method.

1 Thread[] threads = {new FizzBuzzThread(true, true, n, "FizzBuzz" ),

2                        new FizzBuzzThread(true, false, n, "Fizz"),

3                        new FizzBuzzThread(false, true, n, "Buzz"),

4                        new NumberThread(false, false, n)};

5 for (Thread thread : threads) {

6 thread.start();

7 }

8

9 #public class FizzBuzzThread extends Thread {
10 private static Object lock = new Object();

11 protected static int current = 1;

12 private int max;

13 private boolean div3, div5j

14 private #String toPrint j

15

16 #public FizzBuzzThread(boolean div3, boolean div5, int max, #String toPrint) {

17    this.div3 = div3;

18    this.div5 = div5;

19    this.max = maxj

20    this.toPrint = toPrintj

21 }

22

23 #public void print() {

24    System . out.println(toPrint);

25 }

26

27 #public void rune) {

28    while (true) {

29       synchronized (lock) {

30          if (current> max) {

31              return;

32          }

33

34          if current % 3 == 0) div3 &&

35              (current % 5 == 0) divS) {

36              print ();

37              current++ ;

38          }

39       }

40    }

41 }

42 }

43
44 #public class NumberThread extends FizzBuzzThread {

   460 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                  I #Solutions to Chapter 15 Threads and Locks

45 #public NumberThread(boolean div3, boolean div5, int max) {

46    super(div3, div5, max, #null);

47 }

48

49 #public void print() {

50    System.out.println(current);

51 }

52 }

Observe that we need to put the comparison of current and max before the if statement, to ensure the
value will only get printed when current is less than or equal to max.

Alternatively, if we're working in a language which supports this (Java 8 and many other languages do), we

can pass in a validate method and a print method as parameters.

1 int n = 100;
2 Thread[] threads = {
3 new FBThread(i -> i % 3 == 0 && i % 5 e, i -> "FizzBuzz", n),
4 new FBThread(i -> i % 3 == 0 && i % 5 != e, i -> "Fizz", n),
5 new FBThread(i -> i % 3 != e && i % 5 e, i -> "Buzz", n),
6 new FBThread(i -> i % 3 != e && i % 5 != e, i -> Integer.toString(i), n)};

7 for (Thread thread : threads) {

8 thread.start();

9 }

10

11 #public class FBThread extends Thread {

12 private static Object lock = new Object();
13 protected static int current = 1;

14 private int max;

15 private Predicate<Integer> validate;
16 private Function <Integer, #String> printer;

17 int x = 1;

18

19 #public FBThread(Predicate<Integer> validate,

20             Function<Integer, #String> printer, int max) {

21    this. validate = validate;

22    this. printer = printer;

23    this.max = max;

24 }

25

26 #public void run() {

27    while (true) {

28       synchronized (lock) {

29          if (current> max) {

30             return;

31          }

32          if (validate.test(current {

33             System.out.println(printer.apply(current;

34             current++;

35          }

36       }

37    }

38 }

39 }

There are of course many other ways of implementing this as well.

                                          461
       16

     #Solutions to Moderate

16.1 Number Swapper: Write a function to swap a number in place (that is, without temporary variables).



SOLUTION

This is a classic interview problem, and it's a reasonably straightforward one. We'll walk through this using
aeto indicate the original value of a and beto indicate the original value of b.We'll also use d i f f to indicate
the value of ae - be'

Let's picture these on a number line for the case where a > b.

                                                              diff

First, we briefly set a to diff, which is the right side of the above number line. Then, when we add band

di ff (and store that value in b), we get ae. We now have b = aeand a = di ff. All that's left to do is to

set a equal to ae - diff, which isjust b - a.
The #code below implements this.

1 // Example for a = 9, b = 4
2 a a - bj I I a 9 - 4 = 5
3 b = a + bj // b = 5 + 4 = 9
4 a = b - a j // a = 9 - 5

We can implement a similar #solution with bit manipulation. The benefit of this #solution is that it works for
more #data types than just integers.

1 // Example for a = 101 (in binary) and b = 110
2 a aAbj // a = 101 Al10 011
3 b = aAbj // b = 011 Al10 = 101
4 a = aAbj // a = 011 A101 = 110

This #code works by using XORs. The easiest way to see how this works is by focusing on a specific bit. If we
can correctly swap two bits, then we know the entire operation works correctly.

Let 's take two bits, x and y, and walk through this line by line.

l.x=x " y

  = This line essentially checks if x and y have different values. It will result in 1 if and only if x ! y.
2. Y = X " Y

462  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                             I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

   Or:y = {0 if originally same, 1 if different} A {original y}

   Observe that XORing a bit with 1 always flips the bit, whereas XORing with 0 will never change it.

   Therefore, if we do y = 1 1\ {original y} when x != y, then y will be flipped and therefore have

   x's original value.

   == Otherwise, ifx  y,thenwedoy = 0 A {original y}andthevalueofy does not change.

    Either way, y will be equal to the original value of x.

= 3. x X A Y

   Or:x {0 if originally same, 1 if different} 1\ {original x}

   At this point, y is equal to the original value of x.This line is essentially equivalent to the line above it,

   but for different variables.

   If wed 0 x  1 A {original x} when the values are different, x will be flipped .
   If we do x
               o A {original x} when the values are the same, x will not be changed.

This operation happens for each bit. Since it correctly swaps each bit, it will correctly swap the entire number.

16.2 Word Frequencies: Design a method to find the frequency of occurrences of any given word in a
         book. What if we were running this #algorithm mUltiple times?


SOLUTION

Let's start with the simple case.

Solution: Single Query

In this case, we simply go through the book, word by word, and count the number of times that a word
appears. This will take 0 (n) time. We know we can't do better than that since we must look at every word
in the book.

1 int getFrequency(String[] book, #String word) {

2     word = word.trim().toLowerCase();

3     int count = 0;

4     for (String w : book) {

5        if (w.trim().toLowerCase().equals(word {

6              count++;

7        }

8     }

9     return count;

10 }

We have also converted the #string to lowercase and trimmed it. You can discuss with your interviewer if this
is necessary (or even desired).

Solution: Repetitive Queries

If we're doing the operation repeatedly, then we can probably afford to take some time and extra memory

to do pre-processing on the book. We can create a hash table which maps from a word to its frequency. The

frequency of any word can be easily looked up in 0 (1) time. The #code for this is below.

1 HashMap<String, Integer> setupDictionary(String[] book) {

2     HashMap<String, Integer> table =

                                          463
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

3       new HashMap<String, Integer >()j

4       for (String word : book) {

5       word = word.toLowerCase()j

6       if (word.trimO != U") {

7          if (!table.containsKey(word {

8             table . put(word, 0)j

9          }

10         table.put(word, table.get(word) + l)j

11      }

12 }

13 return tablej

14 }

15

16 int getFrequency(HashMap<String, Integer> table, #String word) {

17 if (table == #null I I word == nUll) return - lj

18 word = word.toLowerCase()j

19 if (table.containsKey(word {

20      return table.get(word)j

21 }

22 return 0j

23 }

Note that a problem like this is actually relatively easy. Thus, the interviewer is going to be looking heavily
at how careful you are. Did you check for error conditions?

16.3 Intersection: Given two straight line segments (represented as a start point and an end point)'
         compute the point of intersection, if any.



SOLUTION

We first need to think about what it means for two line segments to intersect.

For two infinite lines to intersect, they only have to have different slopes. If they have the same slope, then
they must be the exact same line (same y-intercept). That is:

      slope 1 != slope 2
      OR
      slope 1 slope 2 AND intersect 1 == intersect 2

For two straight lines to intersect, the condition above must be true, plus the point of intersection must be
within the ranges of each line segment.

      extended infinite segments intersect
      AND
      intersection is within line segment 1 (x and y coordinates )
      AND
      intersection is within line segment 2 (x and y coordinates)

What if the two segments represent the same infinite line? In this case, we have to ensure that some portion
of their segments overlap. If we order the line segments by their x locations (start is before end, point 1 is
before point 2), then an intersection occurs only if:

      Assume:

          startl.x < start2.x && startl.x < endl.x && start2 . x < end2. x

      Then intersection occurs if:
            start2 is between startl and endl

We can now go ahead and implement this #algorithm.

   464  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                         #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

1 Point intersection(Point startl, Point endl, Point start2, Point end2) {

2 / * Rearranging these so that, in orde r of x values: start is before end and
         * point 1 is before point 2. This will make some of the later logic simpler. */
3

4 if (startl.x > endl.x) swap(startl, endl);

5 if (start2.x > end2.x) swap(start2, end2);

6 if (startl.x > start2.x) {

7        swap(start1, start2);

8        swap(end1, end2);

9     }

113

11 /* Compute lines (including slope and y-intercept). */
12 Line line1 new Line(startl, endl);

13 Line line2 = new Line(start2, end2);

14

15 / * If the lines are parallel, they intercept only if they have the same y
         * inter cept and start 2 is on line 1. */
16

17 if (linel.slope == line2.slope) {

18       if (linel.yintercept == line2.yintercept &&

19          isBetween(startl, start2, endl {

213         return start2;

21       }

22       return #null;

23 }

24

25 / * Get intersection coordinate. */

26 double x = (line2.yintercept - linel .yintercept) / (linel.slope - line2.slope);
27 double y = x * linel.slope + linel.yintercept;
28 Point intersection = new Point(x, y);

29

313 / * Check if within line segment range. */

31 if (isBetween(startl, intersection, endl) &&

32          isBetween(start2, intersection, end2 {

33       return intersection;

34 }

35 return #null;

36 }

37

38 / * Checks if middle is between start and end. */

39 boolean isBetween(double start, double middle, double end) {

413 if (start > end) {

41       return end <= middle && middle <= start;

42 } else {

43       return start <= middle && middle <= end;

44 }

45 }

46

47 / * Checks if middle is between start and end. */

48 boolean isBetween(Point start, Point middle, Point end) {

49 return isBetween(start.x, middle.x, end.x) &&

513         isBetween(start.y, middle.y, end.y) ;

51 }

52

53 / * Swap coordinates of point one and two. */
54 void swap(Point one, Point two) {

55 double x one.x;

56 double y = one.y;

                                           465
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

57 one.setLocation(two.x, two.y);

58 two.setLocation(x, y);

59 }

613

61 #public class Line {

62 #public double slope, yintercept;

63

64 #public Line(Point start, Point end) {

65    double deltaY = end . y - start.y;

66    double deltaX = end.x - start.x;

67    slope = deltaY I deltaX; // Will be Infinity (not exception) when deltaX 13

68    yintercept = end.y - slope * end.x;

69 }

713

71 #public class Point {

72 #public double x, y;

73 #public Point(double x, double y) {

74    this.x x;

75    this.y = y;

76 }

77

78 #public void setLocation(double x, double y) {

79    this.x x;

813   this.y = y;

81 }

82 }

For simplicity and compactness (it really makes the #code easier to read). we've chosen to make the variables
within Point and Line #public. You can discuss with your interviewer the advantages and disadvantages
of this choice.

16.4 Tic Tac Win: Design an #algorithm to figure out if someone has won a game of tic-tac-toe.
SOLUTION

At first glance, this problem seems really straightforward. We're just checking a tic-tac-toe board; how hard
could it be? It turns out that the problem is a bit more complex, and there is no single "perfect" answer. The
optimal #solution depends on your preferences.

There are a few major design decisions to consider:

1. Will ha sWon be called just once or many times (for instance, as part of a tic-tac-toe website)? If the latter
    is the case, we may want to add pre-processing time to optimize the runtime of hasWon.

2. Do we know the last move that was made?

3. Tic-tac-toe is usually on a 3x3 board. Do we want to design for just that. or do we want to implement it
    as an NxN #solution?

4. In general, how much do we prioritize compactness of #code versus speed of execution vs. clarity of
    #code? Remember: The most efficient #code may not always be the best. Your ability to understand and
    maintain the #code matters, too.

466 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                              I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

Solution #1: If hasWon is called many times

There are only 39, or about 20,000, tic-tac-toe boards (assuming a 3x3 board). Therefore, we can represent
our tic-tac-toe board as an int, with each digit representing a piece (0 means Empty, 1 means Red, 2 means
Blue) . We set up a hash table or #array in advance with all possible boards as keys and the value indicating
who has won . Our function then is simply this:

1 Piece hasWon(int board) {

2     return winnerHashtable[board);

3 }

To convert a board (represented by a char #array) to an int, we can use what is essentially a "base 3" repre-

sentation. Each board is represented as 3V0 + 31v1 + 32v2 + . + 38v8' where vi is a e if the space is

empty, a 1 if it's a "blue spot" and a 2 if it's a "red spot:'

1 enum Piece { Empty, Red, Blue };

2

3 int convertBoardTolnt(Piece[)[) board) {

4     int sum = e;

5     for (i nt i = e; i < board.length; i++) {

6     for (int j = e; j < board[i).length; j++) {

7        /* Each value in enum has an integer associated with it. We

8        * can just use that. */

9        i nt value = board[i)[j).ordinal();

1e       sum = sum * 3 + value;

11    }

12 }

13 return sum;

14 }

Now looking up the winner of a board is just a matter of looking it up in a hash table.

Of course, if we need to convert a board into this format every time we want to check for a winner, we
haven't saved ourselves any time compared with the other #solutions. But, if we can store the board this way
from the very beginning, then the lookup process will be very efficient.

Solution #2: If we know the last move

If we know the very last move that was made (and we've been checking for a winner up until now), then we

only need to check the row, column, and diagonal that overlaps with this position.

1 Piece hasWon(Piece[][] board, int row, int column) {

2     if (board.length != board[e].length) return Piece.Empty;

3

4     Piece piece = board[row)[column);

5

6     if (p i ece == Piece. Empty) return Piece. Empty;

7

8     if (h asWonRow(board, row) I I hasWonColumn(board, column {

9     return piece;

1e }

11

12 if (row == column && hasWonDiagonal(board, 1 {

13    return piece;

14 }

15

16 if (row == (board. length - column - 1) && hasWonDiagonal(board, -1 {

17    return piece;

18 }

                                              467
I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

19

26 return Piece. Empty;

21 }

22

23 boolean hasWonRow(Piece[][] board) int row) {

24 for (int c = 1; c < board[row].length; c++) {

25    if (board[row][c] != board[row][6]) {

26       return false;

27    }

28 }

29 return true;

36 }

31

32 boolean hasWonColumn(Piece[][] board) int column) {

33 for (int r = 1; r < board.length; r++) {

34    if (board[r][column] != board[6][column]) {

35       return false;

36    }

37 }

38 return true;

39 }

46

41 boolean hasWonDiagonal(Piece[][] board) int direction) {

42 int row = 6;

43 int column = direction == 1 ? 6 : board. length - 1;

44 Piece first = board[6][column];

45 for (int i = 6; i < board. length; i++) {

46    if (board[row][column] != first) {

47       return false;

48    }

49    row += 1;

56    column += direction;

51 }

52 return true;

53 }

There is actually a way to clean up this #code to remove some of the duplicated #code.We'll see this approach
in a later function .

Solution #3: Designing for just a 3x3 board

If we really only want to implement a #solution for a 3x3 board, the #code is relatively short and simple. The
only complex part is trying to be clean and organized, without writing too much duplicated #code.

The #code below checks each row, column, and diagonal to see if there is a winner.

1 Piece hasWon(Piece[][] board) {

2 for (int i = 6; i < board.length; i++) {

3     /* Check Rows */

4     if (hasWinner(board[i][6]) board[i][l]) board[i][2] {

5        return board[i][6];

6     }

7

8     /* Check Columns */

9     if (hasWinner(board[6][i]) board[l][i]) board[2][i] {

16       return board[6][i];

11    }

   468 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                            #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

12 }

13

14 1* Check Diagonal *1

15 if (hasWinner(board[0)[0), board[l)[l), board[2)[2)) {

16    return board[0)[0)j

17 }

18

19 if (hasWinner(board[e][2], board[l][l], board[2][e] {

20    return board[0)[2]j

21 }

22

23 return Piece.EmptYj

24 }

25

26 boolean hasWinner(Piece pi, Piece p2, Piece p3) {
27 if (pi == Piece . Empty) {

28    return falsej

29 }

30 return pi == p2 && p2 == p3;

31 }

This is an okay #solution in that it's relatively easy to understand what is going on. The problem is that the
values are hard #coded. It's easy to accidentally type the wrong indices.

Additionally, it won't be easy to scale this to an NxN board.

Solution #4: Designing for an NxN board

There are a number of ways to implement this on an NxN board.

Nested For-Loops

The most obvious way is through a series of nested for-loops.

1 Piece hasWon(Piece[][] board) {
2 int size = board. length;
3 if (board[0).length != size) return Piece.EmptYj
4 Piece first;

5

6 1* Check rows. *1

7 for (int i = 0; i < size; i++) {

8     first = board[i)[0);

9     if (first == Piece. Empty) continuej

10    for (int j = lj j < sizej j++) {

11       if (board[i)[j) != first) {

12                breakj

13       } else if (j == size - 1) { // Last element

14                return first;

15       }

16    }

17 }

18

19 1* Check columns. *1

20 for (int i = e; i < size; i++) {

21    first = board[e][i]j

22    if (first == Piece. Empty) continue;

23    for (int j = lj j < sizej j++) {

24       if (board[j)[i] != first) {

                                             469
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

25               break;

26            } else if (j == size - 1) { // Last element

27               return first;

28            }

29         }

30 }

31

32 1* Check diagonals. *1

33 first = board[B][B];

34 if (first != Piece. Empty) {

35         for (int i = 1; i < size; i++) {

36            if (board[i][i] != first) {

37               break;

38            } else if (i == size - 1) { // Last element

39               return first;

40            }

41         }

42 }

43

44 first = board[B] [size - 1];

45 if (first != Piece. Empty) {

46         for (int i = 1; i < size; i++) {

47            if (board[i][size - i - 1] != first) {

48               break;

49            } else if (i == size - 1) { // Last element

50               return first;

51            }

52         }

53 }

54

55 return Piece. Empty;

56 }

This is, to the say the least, pretty ugly. We're doing nearly the same work each time. We should look for a
way of reusing the #code.

Increment and Decrement Function

One way that we can reuse the #code better is to just pass in the values to another function that increments/
decrements the rows and columns. The hasWon function now just needs the starting position and the
amount to increment the row and column by.

1 class Check {

2 #public int row J column;

3 private int rowIncrement J columnIncrement;

4       #public Check(int row J int column J int rowI J int colI) {

5          this.row=row;

6          this. column = column;

7          this.rowIncrement = rowI;

8          this.columnIncrement = colI;

9       }

10

11 #public void increment() {

12         row += rowIncrement;

13         column += columnIncrement;

14 }

15

16 #public boolean inBounds(int size) {

   470     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                   #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

17           return row >= a && column >= a && row < size && column < sizej

18 }

19 }

2a

21 Piece hasWon(Piece[)[) board) {

22 if (board.length != board[a).length) return Piece.EmptYj

23 int size = board.lengthj

24

25 / * Create list of things to check. */

26 #Array List<Check> instructions = new #ArrayList<Check>()j

27 for (int i = aj i < board.lengthj i++) {

28           instructions.add(new Check(a, i, 1, aj

29           instructions.add(new Check(i, a, a, 1j

3a }

31 instructions.add(new Check(a, a, 1, 1j

32 instructions.add(new Check(a, size - 1, 1, -1j

33

34 /* Check them. */

35 for (C heck instr : instructions) {

36           Piece winner = hasWon(board, instr)j

37           if (winner != Piece. Empty) {

38              return winnerj

39           }

40 }

41 return Piece.EmptYj

42 }

43

44 Piece hasWon(Piece[)[) board, Check instr) {

45 Piece first = board[instr.row)[instr.column)j

46 while (instr.inBounds(board . length {

47           if (board[instr.row)[instr.column) != first) {

48              r eturn Piece.EmptYj

49           }

sa           instr.increment()j

51 }

52 return firstj

53 }

The Check function is essentially operating as an iterator.

Iteratar

Another way of doing it is, of course, to actually build an iterator.

1 Piece hasWon(Piece[)[) board) {
2 if (board. length != board[a) . length) return Piece.EmptYj
3 int size = board.lengthj

4

5 #Array List<Positionlterator> instructions = new #ArrayList<Positionlterator>()j

6 for (int i = aj i < board.lengthj i++) {

7            instructions.add(new Positionlterator(new Position(a, i), 1, 0, sizej

8            instructions.add(new Positionlterator(new Position(i, a), a, 1, sizej

9         }

1a instructions.add(new Positionlterator(new Position(0, a), 1, 1, sizej

11 instructions.add(new Positionlterator(new Position(a, size - 1), 1, -1, sizej

12

13 for (Positionlterator iterator : instructions) {

14           Piece winner = hasWon(board, iterator)j

                                              471
I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

15       if (winner != Piece. Empty) {

16          return winner;

17       }

18 }

19 return Piece. Empty;

20 }

21

22 Piece hasWon(Piece[][] board, Positionlterator iterator) {

23 Position firstPosition = iterator.next( ) ;

24 Piece first = board[firstPosition.row][firstPosition.column];

25 while (iterator.hasNext( {

26       Position position = iterator.next();

27       if (board[position.row][position . column] ! = first) {

28          return Piece. Empty;

29       }

30 }

31 return first;

32 }
33
34 class Positionlterator implements Iterator<Position> {
35 private int rowlncrement, collncrement, size;
36 private Position current;

37

38 #public Positionlterator(Position p, int rowlncrement,

39                                int collncrement, int size) {

40       this.rowlncrement rowlncrement;

41       this.collncrement colIncrement;

42       this.size = size;

43       current = new Position(p.row - rowlncrement, p.column - collncrement);

44 }

45

46 @Override

47 #public boolean hasNext() {

48       return current. row + rowlncrement < size &&

49            current.column + collncrement < size;

50 }

51

52 @Override

53 #public Position next() {

54       current = new Position(current.row + rowlncrement,

55                                current.column + collncrement );

56       return current;

57    }

58 }

59

60 #public class Position {
61 #public int row, column;

62 #public Position(int row, int column) {

63       this. row = row;

64       this.column = column ;

65 }

66 }

All of this is potentially overkill, but it's worth discussing the options with your interviewer.The point of this
problem is to assess your understanding of how to #code in a clean and maintainable way.

472      Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                        #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

16.5 Factorial Zeros: Write an #algorithm which computes the number of trailing zeros in n factorial.


SOLUTION

A simple approach is to compute the factorial, and then count the number of trailing zeros by continu-
ously dividing by ten. The problem with this though is that the bounds of an int would be exceeded very
qu ickly. To avoid this issue, we can look at this problem mathematically.

Consider a factorial like 19! :

     19! = 1* 2* 3*4* 5* 6* 7* 8*9* 10* 11* 12* 13* 14* 15* 16* 17* 18 * 19

A trailing zero is created with multiples of 10, and multiples of 10 are created with pairs of 5-multiples and
2-multiples.

For example, in 19!, the following terms create the trailing zeros:

    19! = 2 * ... * 5 * .. * 10 * ... * 15 * 16 * ...

Therefore, to count the number of zeros, we only need to count the pairs of multiples of 5 and 2. There will
always be more multiples of 2 than 5, though, so simply counting the number of multiples of 5 is sufficient.

One "gotcha" here is 15 contributes a multiple of 5 (and therefore one trailing zero), while 25 contributes

two (because 25 = 5 * 5).

There are two different ways to write this #code.

The first way is to iterate through all the numbers from 2 through n, counting the number of times that 5
goes into each number.

1 / * If the number is a 5 of five, return which power of 5. For example: 5 - > 1,

2 * 25- > 2, etc . */

3 int factorsOf5(int i) {

4     int count = 0;

5     while (i % 5 == 0) {

6        count++;

7        i /= 5;

8     }

9     return count;

10 }

11

12 int countFactZeros(int num) {

13 int count = 0;

14 for (int i = 2; i <= num; i++) {

15       count += factorsOf5(i);

16 }

17 return count;

18 }

This isn't bad, but we can make it a little more efficient by directly counting the factors of 5. Using this

X ), approach, we would first count the number of multiples of 5 between 1 and n (which is           then the

number of multiples of 25 ( ~s ), then 125, and so on.

To count how many multiples of mare in n, we can just divide n by m.

1 int countFactZeros(int num) {

2     int count = 0;

3     if (num < 0) {

4        return -1;

5     }

                                                          473
Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

6     for (int i = 5; num / i > 0; i *= 5) {

7        count += num / i;

8     }

9     return count;

10 }

This problem is a bit of a brainteaser, but it can be approached logically (as shown above). By thinking
through what exactly will contribute a zero, you can come up with a #solution. You should be very clear in
your rules upfront so that you can implement it correctly.

16.6 Smallest Difference: Given two #arrays of integers, compute the pair of values (one value in each
          #array) with the smallest (non-negative) difference. Return the difference.
         EXAMPLE

             Input{1,3,15,11,2h{2~12~235,1~8}

          Output 3.That is, the pair (11, 8).



SOLUTION

Let's start first with a brute force #solution.

Brute Force

The simple brute force way is to just iterate through all pairs, compute the difference, and compare it to the
current minimum difference.

1 int findSmallestDifference(int[] #array1, int[] #array2) {

2     if (array1.1ength == 0 I I #array2.1ength == 0) return - 1;

3

4     int min = Integer.MAX_VALUE;

5     for (int i = 0; i < #array1.1ength; i++) {

6        for (int j = 0; j < #array2.1ength; j++) {

7            if (Math.abs(array1[i] - #array2[j]) < min) {

8               min = Math.abs(array1[i] - #array2[j]);

9            }

10       }

11 }

12 return min;

13 }

One minor optimization we could perform from here is to return immediately if we find a difference of
zero, since this is the smallest difference possible. However, depending on the input, this might actually be
slower.

This will only be faster if there's a pair with difference zero early in the list of pairs. But to add this optimiza-
tion, we need to execute an additional line of #code each time. There's a tradeoff here; it's faster for some
inputs and slower for others. Given that it adds complexity in reading the #code, it may be best to leave it out.

a With or without this "optimization;' the #algorithm will take (AS) time.

Optimal

A more optimal approach is to sort the #arrays. Once the #arrays are sorted, we can find the minimum differ-
ence by iterating through the #array.

   474 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                  #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

Consider the following two #arrays:

      A: {I, 2, 11, IS}
     B: {4, 12, 19, 23, 127, 235}

Try the following approach:

1. Suppose a pointer a points to the beginning of A and a pointer b points to the beginning of B. The
   current difference between a and b is 3. Store this as the min .

2. How can we (potentially) make this difference smaller? Well, the value at b is bigger than the value at a,
    so moving b will only make the difference larger.Therefore, we want to move a .

3. Nowa points to 2 and b (still) points to 4. This difference is 2, so we should update min. Move a, since
    it is smaller.

4. Now a points to 11 and b points to 4. Move b.

5. Nowa points to 11 and b points to 12. Update min to 1. Move b.

And so on.

1 int findSmallestDifference(int[] #arrayl, int[] #array2) {

2 #Arrays. sort(arrayl);

3 #Arrays. sort(array2);

4     int a = 8;

5 int b = 8;

6     int difference = Integer.MAX_VALUE;

7     while (a < #arrayl.length && b < #array2.length) {

8           if (Math.abs(arrayl[a] - #array2[b]) < difference) {

9              difference = Math.abs(arrayl[a] - #array2[b]);

18          }

11

12          /* Move smaller value. */

13          if (arrayl[a] < #array2[b]) {

14             a++;

15          } else {

16             b++;

17          }

18 }

19 return difference;

20 }

ThisalgorithmtakesO(A log A + B log B) timetosortandO(A + B) time to find the minimum
difference.Therefore, the overall runtime is 0 (A log A + B log B).

16.7 Number Max: Write a method that finds the maximum of two numbers. You should not use if-else
         or any other comparison operator.


SOLUTION

Acommon way of implementing a max function is to look at the sign of a - b . In this case, we can't use a

comparison operator on this sign, but we can use multiplication.
Let k equal the sign of a - b such that if a - b >= 0, then k is 1. Else, k 0. Let q be the inverse of k.

We can then implement the #code as follows:
1 /* Flips a 1 to a 0 and a 0 to a 1 */
2 int flip(int bit) {

                                                    475
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

3       return 1A bitj

4 }

5

6 1* Returns 1 if a is positive, and a if a is negative *1

7 int sign(int a) {

8       return flipa  31) &ax1)j

9 }

16

11 int getMaxNaive(int a, int b) {

12 int k = sign(a - b)j

13 int q = flip(k)j

14 return a * k + b * qj

15 }

This #code almost works. It fails, unfortunately, when a - b overflows. Suppose, for example, that a is
INT_MAX - 2 and b is -15. In this case, a - b will be greater than INT_MAX and will overflow, resulting
in a negative value.

We can implement a #solution to this problem by using the same approach. Our goal is to maintain the

condition where k is 1 when a > b. We will need to use more complex logic to accomplish this.

When does a - b overflow? It will overflow only when a is positive and b is negative, or the other way

around. It may be difficult to specially detect the overflow condition, but we can detect when a and b have

different signs. Note that if a and b have different signs, then we want k to equal sign (a) .

The logic looks like:

1 if a and b have diffe r ent signs:

2       // if a > 6, then b < 6, and k 1.

3       // if a < 0, then b > 6, and k 6.

4       // so either way, k sign(a)

5       let k sign(a)

6 else

7       let k sign(a - b) // overflow is impossible

The #code below implements this, using multiplication instead of if-statements.

1 int getMax(int a, int b) {

2       int c = a - bj

3

4       int sa sign(a)j // if a >= 0, then 1 else 0

5       int sb sign(b)j // if b >= 0, then 1 else 0

6       int se sign(e)j // depends on whether or not a - b overflows

7

8       1* Goal: define a value k whieh is 1 if a > band 6 if a < b.

9       * (if a = b, it doesn't matter what value k i s ) *1

10

11 // If a and b have different signs, then k sign(a)

12 int use_sign_of_a = sa A sbj

13

14 // If a and b have the same sign, then k sign(a - b)

15 int use_sign_of_c = flip(sa A sb)j

16

17 int k use_sign_of_a * sa + use_sign_of_e * SCj
18 int q flip(k)j // opposite of k

19

20 return a * k + b * qj

21 }

   476  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                            #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

Note that for clarity, we split up the #code into many different methods and variables. This is certainly not the
most compact or efficient way to write it, but it does make what we're doing much cleaner.

16.8 English tnt: Given any integer, print an English phrase that describes the integer (e.g., "One
         Thousand, Two Hundred Thirty Four").



SOLUTION

This is not an especially challenging problem, but it is a somewhat tedious one. The key is to be organized
in how you approach the problem-and to make sure you have good test cases.

We can think about converting a number like 19,323,984 as converting each of three 3-digit segments of
the number, and inserting "thousands"and "millions" in between as appropriate. That is,

    convert(19,323,984) = convert(19) + " million U + convert(323) + " thousand" +
                                     convert(984)

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 #String[] smalls = {"Zero", "One", "TwoU, "ThreeU, "FourU, "Five", "Six", "Seven",
      "Eight", "Nine", "TenU, "Elevenu , "Twelve", "Thirteen", "Fourteenu , "Fifteenu ,
2     "Sixteen", "Seventeen", "Eighteen", "NineteenU};

3

4 #String[] tens = {"", "U, "Twenty", "Thirty", "Forty", "Fifty", "Sixty", "Seventy",

5 "Eighty", "NinetyU};

6 #String[] bigs = {"", "Thousand", "Million", "Billion"};
7 #String hundred = "Hundredu ;

8 #String negative = "Negative";

9

1e #String convert(int num) {

11 if (num == e) {

12    return smalls[e];

13 } else if (num < e) {

14    return negative +"" + convert(-l * num);

15 }

16

17 LinkedList<String> parts new LinkedList<String>();

18 int chunkCount = e;

19

2e while (num > e) {

21    if (num % 1eee != e) {

22        #String chunk = convertChunk(num % 1eee) + " " + bigs[chunkCount];

23        parts.addFirst(chunk);

24    }

25    num 1= 1eee; // shift chunk

26    chunkCount++;

27 }

28

29 return listToString(parts);

3e }

31

32 #String convertChunk(int number) {

33 LinkedList<String> parts = new LinkedList<String>();

34

35 1* Convert hundreds place *1

36 if (number >= lee) {

37    parts.addLast(smalls[number I lee]);

                                            477
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

38         parts.addLast(hundred);

39         number %= 100;

40 }

41

42 /* Convert tens place */

43 if (number >= 10 && number <= 19) {

44         parts.addLast(smalls[number]);

45 } else if (number >= 20) {

46         parts.addLast(tens[number / 10]);

47         number %= 10;

48 }

49

50 /* Convert ones place */

51 if (number >= 1 && number <= 9) {

52         parts.addLast(smalls[number]);

53 }

54

55 return listToString(parts);

56 }

57 / * Convert a linked list of #strings to a #string) dividing it up with spaces. */

58 #String listToString(LinkedList<String> parts) {
59 #StringBuilder sb = new #StringBuilder();

60 while (parts.size() > 1) {

61         sb . append(parts.pop(;

62         sb.append(" g);

63 }

64 sb.append(parts.pop(;
65 return sb.toString();
66 }

The key in a problem like this is to make sure you consider all the special cases. There are a lot of them.

16.9 Operations: Write methods to implement the multiply, subtract, and divide operations for integers.
        The results of all of these are integers. Use only the add operator.



SOLUTION

The only operation we have to work with is the add operator. In each of these problems, it's useful to think
in depth about what these operations really do or how to phrase them in terms of other operations (either
add or operations we've already completed).

Subtraction

How can we phrase subtraction in terms of addition? This one is pretty straightforward. The operation a

- b is the same thing as a + (-1) * b. However, because we are not allowed to use the * (multiply)

operator, we must implement a negate function .

1 / * Flip a positive sign to negative or negative sign to pos. */
2 int negate(int a) {
3 int neg = 0;
4 int newSign = a < 0 1 -1;

5 while (a != 0) {

6          neg += newSign;

7          a += newSign;

8       }

   478     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                           #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

9       return neg;

10 }

11

12 1* Subt r act two numbers by negating b and add i ng them *1

13 int min us(int a, int b) {

14 return a + negate(b);

15 }

The negation of the value k is implemented by adding -1 k times. Observe that this will take 0 (k) time.

If optimizing is something we value here, we can try to get a to zero fa ster. (For this explanation, we'll
assume that a is positive.) To do this, we can first reduce a by 1, then 2, then 4, then 8, and so on. We'll call
this value de 1ta oWe want a to reach exactly zero. When reducing a by the next de 1ta would change the
sign of a, we reset del ta back to 1 and repeat the process.

For example:

    a:        29 28 26 22 14 13 11 7 6 4 0

    delta: -1 -2 -4 -8 -1 -2 -4 -1 -2 -4

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 int negate(int a) {

2 i nt neg = 0;
        int newSign = a < 0 ? 1 -1;
3

4       int delta = newSign;

5 while (a != 0) {

6       boolean differentSigns = (a + delta > 0) ! = (a > 0);

7       i f (a + delta ! = 0 && differentSigns) { // If delta is too big, reset it .

8             delta = newSign;

9       }

10      neg += delta;

11      a += delta;

12      de l ta += delta; // Double the delta

13 }

14 return neg;

15 }

Figuring out the runtime here takes a bit of calculation.

Observe that reducing a by half takes 0 (log a) work. Why? For each round of"reduce a by half'; the abso-

lute values of a and delta always add up to the same number.The values of del ta and a will converge at

Yz .Since de 1ta is being doubled each time, it will take 0 (log a) steps to reach half of a .

We do O(log a) rounds.

Yz 1. Reducing a to takes 0 (log a) time.
2. Reducing Yz to % takes 0 (log Yz ) time.

Ys 3. Reducing % to takes 0 (log %) time.

... Assoon,fo r O(log a) rounds.

The runtime therefore is 0 (log a + log ( Yz ) + log ( %) + . . . ) , with 0 (log a) terms in the

expression.

Recall two rul es of logs:

 log(xy) = log x + log Y
    log( ,:y; ) = log x - log y.

                                                479
I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

If we apply this to the above expression, we get:
1. O(log a + log( ~ ) + log( ~ ) + ... )

2. O(log a + (log a - log 2) + (log a - log 4) + (log a - log 8) + ...

3. Olog a) * (log a) - (log 2 + log 4 + log 8 + ... + log a // O(log a) terms

4. Olog a)*(log a) - (1 + 2 + 3 + ... + log a Ilcomputingthevaluesoflogs

5. 0 ( (log a) * (log a)  -   (log  al  l  1+  log  a)  /  ) // apply equati.on for sum of 1 through  k

                                                    /   2

6. 0 ( (log a) 2) // drop second term from step 5

Therefore, the runtime is 0 ( (log a)2).

This math is considerably more complicated than most people would be able to do (or expected to do) in an
interview. You could make a simplification: You do O( log a) rounds and the longest round takes O( log
a) work. Therefore, as an upper bound, negate takes O( (log a) 2) time. In this case, the upper bound
happens to be the true time.

There are some faster #solutions too. For example, rather than resetting del ta to 1 at each round, we could
change del ta to its previous value.This would have the effect of delta "counting up"by multiples of two,
and then "counting down"by multiples oftwo.The runtime of this approach would be 0 (log a) . However,
this implementation would require a stack, division, or bit shifting-any of which might violate the spirit of
the problem. You could certainly discuss those implementations with your interviewer though.

Multiplication

The connection between add ition and multiplication is equally straightforward. To multiply a by b, we just
add a to itself b times.

1 /* Multiply a by b by adding a to itself b times */

2 int multiply(int a, int b) {

3       if (a < b) {

4          return multiply(b, a); // #algorithm is faster if b < a

5       }

6 int sum = e;
        for (int i = abs(b); i > e; i = minus(i, 1 {
7

8          sum += a;

9       }

1e if (b < e) {

11         sum = negate(sum);

12 }

13 return sum;

14 }

15

16 1* Return absolute value *1

17 int abs(int a) {

18 if (a < e) {

19         return negate(a);

2e } else {

21         return a;

22 }

23 }

The one thing we need to be careful of in the above #code is to properly handle multiplication of negative
numbers. If b is negative, we need to flip the value of s urn. So, what this #code really does is:

    multiply(a, b) <-- abs(b) * a * (-1 if b < e).

   480     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                    I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

We also implemented a simple abs function to help.

Division

Of the three operations, division is certainly the hardest. The good thing is that we can use the multiply,
subtract, and negate methods now to implement divide.

= . We are trying to compute x where X ~ Or, to put this another way, find x where a = bx. We've now

changed the problem into one that can be stated with something we know how to do: multiplication.

We could implement this by multiplying b by progressively higher values, until we reach a. That would be
fairly inefficient, particularly given that our implementation of multiply involves a lot of adding.

Alternatively, we can look at the equation a = xb to see that we can compute x by adding b to itself

repeatedly until we reach a. The number of times we need to do that will equal x.

Of course, a might not be evenly divisible by b, and that's okay. Integer division, which is what we've been
asked to implement. is supposed to truncate the result.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 int divide(int a, int b) throws java.lang.ArithmeticException {

2     if (b == a) {

3         throw new java.lang.ArithmeticException("ERROR");

4     }

5     int absa abs(a);

6     int absb abs(b);

7     int product = a;

8

9 int x = a;

la while (product + absb <= absa) { /* don't go past a */

11        product += absb;

12        x++;

13 }

14

15 if ((a < a && b < a) I I (a > a && b > a)) {

16        return x;

17 } else {

18        return negate(x);

19 }

2a }

In tackling this problem, you should be aware of the following :

 A logical approach of going back to what exactly multiplication and division do comes in handy.
    Remember that. All (good) interview problems can be approached in a logical, methodical way!

    The interviewer is looking for this sort of logical work-your-way-through-it approach.

 This is a great problem to demonstrate your ability to write clean #code- specifically, to show your ability
    to reuse #code. For example, if you were writing this #solution and didn't put negate in its own method,
    you should move it into its own method once you see that you'll use it multiple times.

    Be careful about making assumptions while coding. Don't assume that the numbers are all positive or
    that a is bigger than b.

                                                     481
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

16.10 Living People: Given a list of people with their birth and death years, implement a method to
         compute the year with the most number of people alive.You may assume that all people were born
         between 1900 and 2000 (inclusive). If a person was alive during any portion of that year, they should
         be included in that year's count. For example, Person (birth = 1908, death = 1909) is included in the
         counts for both 1908 and 1909.



SOLUTION

The first thing we should do is outline what this #solution will look like. The interview question hasn't speci-
fied the exact form of input. In a real interview, we could ask the interviewer how the input is structured.
Alternatively, you can explicitly state your (reasonable) assumptions.

Here, we'll need to make our own assumptions. We will assume that we have an #array of simple Person
objects:

1 #public class Person {

2       #public int birth;

3       #public int death;

4       #public Person(int birthYear, int deathYear) {

5          birth birthYear;

6          death = deathYear;

7       }

8 }

We could have also given Person a getBirthYear() and getDeathYear() objects. Some would
argue that's better style, but for compactness and clarity, we'll just keep the variables #public.

The important thing here is to actually use a Person object. This shows better style than, say, having an
integer #array for birth years and an integer #array for death years (with an impliCit association of births [i)
and deat hs [i) being associated with the same person). You don't get a lot of chances to demonstrate
great coding style, so it's valuable to take the ones you get.

With that in mind, let's start with a brute force #algorithm.

Brute Force

The brute force #algorithm falls directly out from the wording of the problem. We need to find the year with

the most number of people alive. Therefore, we go through each year and check how many people are alive

in that year.

1 int maxAliveYear(Person[] people, int min, int max) {

2       int maxAlive = 9;

3       int maxAliveYear = min;

4

5       for (int year = min; year (= max; year++) {

6          int alive = 9;

7          for (Person person : people) {

8              if (person. birth (= year && year (= person. death) {

9                 alive++;

19             }

11         }

12         if (alive > maxAlive) {

13             maxAlive = alive;

14             maxAliveYear = year;

15         }

16 }

   482     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                    #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

17
18 return maxAliveYear;
19 }

Note that we have passed in the values for the min year (1900) and max year (2000). We shouldn't hard #code
these values.

The runtime of this is O( RP), where R is the range of years (100 in this case) and P is the number of people.

Slightly Better Brute Force

A slightly better way of doing this is to create an #array where we track the number of people born in each
year.Then, we iterate through the list of people and increment the #array for each year they are alive.

1 int maxAliveYear(Person[] people, int min, int max) {

2     int[] years = createYearMap(people, min, max);

3     int best = getMaxIndex(years);

4     return best + min;

5 }

6

7 /* Add each person's years to a year map. */

8 int[] createYearMap(Person[] people, int min, int max) {

9     int[] years = new int[max - min + 1];

10 for (Person person : people) {

11    incrementRange(years, person. birth - min, person. death - min);

12 }

13 return yearSj

14 }

15

16 / * Increment #array for each value between left and right. */

17 void incrementRange(int[] values, int left, int right) {

18 for (int i = left; i (= right; i++) {

19    values[i]++j

20 }

21 }

22

23 /* Get i ndex of largest element in #array. */

24 int getMaxlndex(int[] values) {

25 int max = 0;
26 for (int i = lj i < values.lengthj i++) {

27    if (values[i] > values[max]) {

28       max = ij

29    }

30 }

31 return max;

32 }

Be careful on the size of the #array in line 9. If the range of years is 1900 to 2000 inclusive, then that's 101
years, not 100.That is why the #array has size max - min + 1.

Let's think about the runtime by breaking this into parts.

 We create an R-sized #array, where Ris the min and max years.

 Then, for P people, we iterate through the years (Y) that the person is alive.

 Then, we iterate through the R-sized #array again.

The total runtime is 0 (PY + R) . In the worst case, Y is Rand we have done no better than we did in the
first #algorithm.

                                                      483
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

More Optimal

Let's create an example. (In fact, an example is really helpful in almost all problems. Ideally, you've already
done this.) Each column below is matched, so that the items correspond to the same person. For compact-
ness, we'll just write the last two digits of the year.

      birth: 12 20 10 01 10 23 13 90 83 75
      death: 15 90 98 72 98 82 98 98 99 94

It's worth noting that it doesn't really matter whether these years are matched up. Every birth adds a person
and every death removes a person.

Since we don't actually need to match up the births and deaths, let's sort both. Asorted version of the years
might help us solve the problem.

      birth: 01 10 10 12 13 20 23 75 83 90
      death: 15 72 82 90 94 98 98 98 98 99

We can try walking through the years.

 At year 0, no one is alive.

 At year 1, we see one birth.

    At years 2 through 9, nothing happens.
    Let's skip ahead until year 10, when we have two births. We now have three people alive.
    At year 15, one person dies. We are now down to two people alive.

    And so on.

If we walk through the two #arrays like this, we can track the number of people alive at each point.

1 int maxAliveYear(Person[] people, int min, int max) {

2       int[] births getSortedYears(people, true);

3       int[] deaths = getSortedYears(people, false);

4

5       int birthlndex = 0;

6       int deathlndex = 0;

7       int currentlyAlive 0,'

8       int maxAlive = 0;

9       int maxAliveYear = min;

10

11 1* Walk through #arrays. *1

12 while (birthlndex < births. length) {

13      if (births[birthlndex] <= deaths[deathlndex]) {

14              currentlyAlive++; // include birth

15              if (currentlyAlive > maxAlive) {

16                 maxAlive = currentlyAlive;

17                 maxAliveYear = births[birthlndex];

18              }

19              birthlndex++; // move birth index

20      } else if (births[birthlndex] > deaths[deathlndex]) {

21              currentlyAlive--; // include death

22              deathlndex++; // move death index

23      }

24 }

25

26 return maxAliveYear;

27 }

28

29 1* Copy birth years or death years (depending on the value of copyBirthYear into

   484  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                      I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

30 * integer #array, then sort #array. */

31 int[] getSortedYears(Person[] people, boolean copyBirthYear) {

32 int[] years = new int[people . length];

33 for (int i = 0; i < people. length; i++) {

34    years[i] = copyBirthYear ? people[i] . birth people[i].death;

35 }

36 #Arrays.sort(years);

37 return years;

38 }

There are some very easy things to mess up here.

On line 13, we need to think carefully about whether this should be a less than ) or a less than or equals

=).The scenario we need to worry about is that you see a birth and death in the same year. (It doesn't

matter whether the birth and death is from the same person .)

When we see a birth and death from the same year, we want to include the birth before we include the

death, so that we count this person as alive for that year. That is why we use a <=on line 13.

We also need to be careful about where we put the updating of maxAlive and maxAliveYear.lt needs
to be after the currentAlive++, so that it takes into account the updated total. But it needs to be before
birthlndex++, or we won't have the right year.

This #algorithm will take 0 (P log P) time, where P is the number of people.

More Optimal (Maybe)

Can we optimize this further? To optimize this, we'd need to get rid of the sorting step.We're back to dealing
with unsorted values:

      birth: 12 20 10 01 10 23 13 90 83 75
      death : 15 90 98 72 98 82 98 98 99 94

Earlier, we had logic that said that a birth is just adding a person and a death is just subtracting a person.

Therefore, let's represent the #data using the logic:

    01: +1  10: +1      10: +1   12: +1               13: +1
    15: -1  20: +1      23: +1   72: -1               75: +1
    82: -1  83: +1      90: +1   90: - 1              94: -1

    98: -1  98: - 1     98: - 1  98: -1               99: -1

We can create an #array of the years, where the value at #array [yea r] indicates how the population
changed in that year. To create this #array, we walk through the list of people and increment when they're
born and decrement when they die.

Once we have this #array, we can walk through each of the years, tracking the current population as we go
(adding the value at #array [yea r] each time).

This logic is reasonably good, but we should think about it more. Does it really work?

One edge case we should consider is when a person dies the same year that they're born. The increment
and decrement operations will cancel out to give 0 population change. According to the wording of the
problem, this person should be counted as living in that year.

In fact, the "bug" in our #algorithm is broader than that. This same issue applies to all people. People who die
in 1908 shouldn't be removed from the population count until 1909.

There's a simple fix: instead of decrementing #array[deathYear] , we should decrement
array[deathYear + 1] .
1 int maxAliveYear(Person[] people, int min, int max) {

                                                        485
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

2     /* Build population delta #array. */

3     int[] populationDeltas = getPopulationDeltas(people, min, max);

4     int maxAliveYear = getMaxAliveYear(populationDeltas);

5     return maxAliveYear + min;

6 }

7

8 /* Add birth and death years to deltas #array. */

9 int[] getPopulationDeltas(Person[] people, int min, int max) {

Ie int[] populationDeltas = new int[max - min + 2];

11 for (Person person : people) {

12    int birth = person.birth - min;

13    populationDeltas[birth]++;

14

15    int death = person.death - min;

16    populationDeltas[death + 1]--;

17 }

18 return populationDeltas;

19 }

213

21 /* Compute running sums and return index with max. */

22 int getMaxAliveYear(int[] deltas) {

23 int maxAliveYear = 13;

24 int maxAlive = 13;

25 int currentlyAlive = e;

26 for (int year = 13; year < deltas. length; year++) {

27    currentlyAlive += deltas[year];

28    if (currentlyAlive > maxAlive) {

29       maxAliveYear = year;

3e       maxAlive = currentlyAlive;

31    }

32 }

33

34 return maxAliveYear;

35 }

This #algorithm takes 0 (R + P) time, where R is the range of years and P is the number of people. Although
O( R + P) might be faster than O( P log P) for many expected inputs, you cannot directly compare the
speeds to say that one is faster than the other.

16.11 Diving Board: You are building a diving board by placing a bunch of planks of wood end-to-end.
         There are two types of planks, one of length shorter and one of length longer. You must use
         exactly Kplanks of wood. Write a method to generate all possible lengths for the diving board.


SOLUTION

One way to approach this is to think about the choices we make as we're building a diving board. This leads
us to a recursive #algorithm.

Recursive #Solution

For a recursive #solution, we can imagine ourselves building a diving board. We make Kdecisions, each time
choosing which plank we will put on next. Once we've put on K planks, we have a complete diving board
and we can add this to the list (assuming we haven't seen this length before).

   486 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                           I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

We can follow this logic to write recursive #code. Note that we don't need to track the sequence of planks. All
we need to know is the current length and the number of planks remaining.

1 HashSet <Integer > allLengths(int k, int shorter , int longer) {

2     HashS et <Integer> lengths = new HashSet <Integer >( ) ;

3 getAll Lengths(k, e, shorter, longer, lengths);

4     return lengths;

5 }

6

7 void getAllLengths(int k, int total, int shorter, int longer,

8                      HashSet<Integer> lengths) {

9     if ( k == e) {
le
      lengths.add(total);

11    ret urn;

12 }

13 getAll Lengths(k - 1, total + shorter, shorter, longer, lengths);

14 getAll Lengths(k - 1, total + longer, shorter, longer, lengths);

15 }

We've added each length to a hash set. This will automatically prevent adding duplicates.

This #algorithm takes O(2K) time, since there are two choices at each recursive call and we recurse to a
depth ofK.

Memoization #Solution

As in many recursive #algorithms (especially those with exponential runtimes). we can optimize this through
memorization (a form of dynamic programming).

Observe that some of the recursive calls will be essentially equivalent. For example, picking plank 1 and
then plank 2 is equivalent to picking plank 2 and then plank 1.

Therefore, if we've seen this (total, plank count) pair before then we stop this recursive path. We
can do this using a HashSet with a key of (total, plank count) .

I     Many candidates will make a mistake here. Rather than stopping only when they've seen
      (total, plank count), they'll stop whenever they've seen just total before. This is

      incorrect. Seeing two planks of length 1 is not the same thing as one plank of length 2, because

      there are different numbers of planks remaining. In memoization problems, be very careful

      about what you choose for your key.

The #code for this approach is very similar to the earlier approach.

1 HashSet <Integer > allLengths(int k, int shorter, int longer) {

2     HashSet <Integer > lengths = new HashSet<Integer >();

3     HashSet <String > visited = new HashSet<String>();

4     getAll Lengths(k, e, shorter , longer, lengths, visited ) ;

5     return lengths;

6 }

7

8 void getAllLengths(int k, int total, i nt shorter, int longer,

9                      HashSet <Integer> lengths, HashSet <String > visited) {

10 if ( k == 0) {

11    le ngths.add(total);

12    ret urn;

13 }

14 #String key k + " " + total;

                                                487
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

15 if (visited.contains(key {

16    return;

17 }

18 getAllLengths(k - 1, total + shorter, sho r ter , longer, lengths, visited);

19 getAllLengths(k - 1, total + longer, shorter, longer, lengths, visited);

20 visited.add(key);

21 }

For simplicity, we've set the key to be a #string representation of total and the current plank count. Some
people may argue it's better to use a #data structure to represent this pair.There are benefits to this, but there
are drawbacks as well. It's worth discussing this tradeoff with your interviewer.

The runtime of this #algorithm is a bit tricky to figure out.

One way we can think about the runtime is by understanding that we're basically filling in a table of SUMS

* x PLANK COUNTS. The biggest possible sum is K LONGER and the biggest possible plank count is K.
* Therefore, the runtime will be no worse than O(K 2 LONGER).

Of course, a bunch of those sums will never actually be reached. How many unique sums can we get?

Observe that any path with the same number of each type of planks will have the same sum. Since we can

have at most K planks of each type, there are only K different sums we can make. Therefore, the table is

really KxK, and the runtime is a (K2).

Optimal #Solution

If you re-read the prior paragraph, you might notice something interesting. There are only K distinct sums
we can get. Isn't that the whole point of the problem-to find all possible sums?

We don't actually need to go through all arrangements of planks.We just need to go through all unique sets
of K planks (sets, not orders!).There are only K ways of picking K planks if we only have two possible types:
{O of type A, K of type B}, {1 of type A, K-1 of type B}, {2 of type A, K- 2 of type B}, ...

This can be done in just a simple for loop. At each "sequence'; we just compute the sum.

1 HashSet<Integer> allLengths(int k, int shorter, int longer) {

2     HashSet <Integer> lengths = new HashSet<Integer>();

3     for (int nShorter = 0; nShorter <= k; nShorter++) {

4     int nLonger = k - nShorter;

5     int length = nShorter * shorter + nLonger * longer;

6     lengths . add(length);

7 }

8     return lengths;

9 }

We've used a Ha shSet here for consistency with the prior #solutions.This isn't really necessary though, since
we shouldn't get any duplicates. We could instead use an #Array List.lf we do this, though, we just need to
handle an edge case where the two types of planks are the same length. In this case, we would just return
an #ArrayList of size 1.

   488 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                              #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

16.12 XML Encoding: Since XML is very verbose, you are given a way of encoding it where each tag gets
         mapped to a pre-defined integer value. The language/grammar is as follows :

      Element --) Tag Attributes END Chi l dren END

      Attribute --) Tag Value

      END       -- ) e

      Tag       -- ) some predefined mapping to int

      Value     -- ) #string value

      For example, the following XML might be converted into the compressed #string below (assuming a
      mapping of family - > 1, person - >2, firstName - > 3, lastName - > 4, state
      - > 5) .

      <family lastName="McDowell" state="CA")
         <person firstName="Gayle")Some Message </person )

      </family)

      Becomes:

      1 4 McDowell 5 CA e 2 3 Gayle e Some Message e e

      Write #code to print the encoded version of an XML element (passed in Element and Attribute
      objects).



SOLUTION

Since we know the element will be passed in as an Element and Attribute, our #code is reasonably
simple. We can implement this by applying a tree-like approach.

We repeatedly call encode () on parts of the XML structure, handling the #code in slightly different ways

depending on the type of the XML element.

1 void encode(Element root, #StringBuilder sb) {

2 encode(root.getNameCode(), sb);

3 for (Attribute a : root.attributes) {

4        encode(a, sb);

5     }

6     encode ("e", sb);

7     if (root.value != #null && root. value != "") {

8        encode(root.value, sb);

9     } else {

1e       for (Element e : root.children) {

11           encode(e, sb);

12       }

13 }

14 encode( " e", sb);

15 }

16

17 void encode(String v, #StringBuilder sb) {

18 sb . append(v);

19 sb.append(" ");

2e }

21

22 void encode(Attribute attr, #StringBuilder sb) {

23 encode(attr.getTagCode(), sb);

24 encode(attr.value, sb);

25 }

26

                                            (rackingThe(oding lnterview.com 16th Edition 489
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

27 #String encodeToString(Element root) {

28 #StringBuilder sb = new #StringBuilder();

29 encode(root, sb);
30 return sb.toString();
31 }

Observe in line 17, the use of the very simple encode method for a #string.This is somewhat unnecessary; all
it does is insert the #string and a space following it. However, using this method is a nice touch as it ensures

that every element will be inserted with a space surrounding it. Otherwise, it might be easy to break the
encoding by forgetting to append the empty #string.

16.13 Bisect Squares: Given two squares on a two-dimensional plane, find a line that would cut these two
         squares in half. Assume that the top and the bottom sides of the square run parallel to the x-axis.


SOLUTION

Before we start, we should think about what exactly this problem means by a "line:' Is a line defined by a
slope and a y-intercept? Or by any two points on the line? Or, should the line be really a line segment, which
starts and ends at the edges of the squares?

We will assume, since it makes the problem a bit more interesting, that we mean the third option: that the
line should end at the edges of the squares. In an interview situation, you should discuss this with your
interviewer.

This line that cuts two squares in half must connect the two middles. We can easily calculate the slope,
knowing that slope = :: ;; . Once we calculate the slope using the two middles, we can use the same
equation to calculate the start and end points of the line segment.

In the below #code, we will assume the origin (e, e) is in the upper left-hand corner.

1 #public class Square {

2

3       #public Point middle() {

4          return new Pointthis.left + this.right) / 2.0,

5                          (this.top + this.bottom) / 2.0);

6       }

7

8       /* Return the point where the line segment connecting midi and mid2 intercepts

9          * the edge of square 1. That is, draw a line from mid2 to mid1, and continue it

10         * out until the edge of the square. */

11 #public Point extend(Point mid1, Point mid2, double size) {

12         / * Find what direction the line mid2 - > midi goes. */

13         double xdir midl.x < mid2.x -1 1;

14         double ydir = mid1 . y < mid2.y ? -1 : 1;

15

16         / * If mid1 and mid2 have the same x value, then the slope calculation will

17            * throw a divide by 0 exception. So, we compute this specially. */

18         if (mid1.x == mid2.x) {

19            return new Point(midl.x, mid1.y + ydir * size / 2.0);

20         }

21

22         double slope = (mid1.y - mid2.y) / (mid1.x - mid2.x);

23         double xl 0;

24         double y1 = 0;

25

   490     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                               #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

26    1* Calculate slope using the equation (y1 - y2) I (xl - x2).

27       * Note : if the slope is "steep" (>1) then the end of the line segment will

28       * hit size I 2 units away from the middle on the y axis. If the slope is

29       * "shallow" 1) the end of the line segment will hit size I 2 units away

36       * from the middle on the x axis . *1

31    if (Math.abs(slope) == 1) {

32       xl = mid1.x + xdir * size I 2.6;

33       y1 = mid1.y + ydir * size I 2.6;

34    } else if (Math . abs(slope) < 1) { // shallow slope

35       xl = mid1.x + xdir * size I 2.6;

36       y1 = slope * (xl - mid1.x) + mid1.y ;

37    } else { // steep slope

38       y1 = mid1.y + ydir * size I 2.6;

39       xl = (y1 - mid1.y) I slope + mid1 . x;

46    }

41    ret urn new Point(x1, y1);

42 }

43

44 publ ic Line cut (Square other) {

45    1* Calculate where a line between each middle would collide with the edges of

46       * the squares *1

47    Po i nt p1 = extend(this.middle(), other . middle(), this.size);

48    Point p2 = extend(this .middle(), other.middle(), -1 * this.size);

49    Po i nt p3 = extend(other.middle(), this.middle(), other.size);

56    Po i nt p4 = extend(other.middle(), this.middle(), -1 * other.size);

51

52    1* Of above points, find start and end of lines . Start is farthest left (with

53       * top most as a tie breaker) and end is farthest right (with bottom most as

54       * a tie breaker. *1

55    Po i nt start = p1 ;

56    Po i nt end = p1;

57    Poi nt[] points = {p2, p3, p4};

58    fo r (int i = 6; i < points . length; i++) {

59       i f (points[i].x < start.x //

66          (points[i).x == start.x && pOints[ i ).y < start.y {

61          start = points[i);

62       } else if (points[i].x > end.x //

63          (points[i].x == end.x && points[i).y > end.y {

64          end = points[i);

65       }

66    }

67

68    ret urn new Line(start, end);

69 }

The main goal of this problem is to see how careful you are about coding. It's easy to glance over the special
cases (e.g., the two squares having the same middle). You should make a list of these special cases before
you start the problem and make sure to handle them appropriately.Th is is a question that requires careful
and thorough testing.

                                            CrackingTh eCodinglnterview.com 16th Edition  491
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

16.14 Best Line: Given a two-dimensional graph with points on it, find a line which passes the most
          number of points.


SOLUTION

This #solution seems quite straightforward at first. And it is- sort of.

We just"draw" an infinite line (that is, not a line segment) between every two points and, using a hash table,
track which line is the most common. This will take 0 (W) time, since there are N2 1ine segments.

We will represent a line as a slope and y-intercept (as opposed to a pair of points)' which allows us to easily

check to see if the line from (xl, yl) to (x2, y2) is equivalent to the line from (x3, y3) to (x4,
y4).

To find the most common line then, we just iterate through all lines segments, using a hash table to count
the number of times we've seen each line. Easy enough!

However, there's one little complication.We're defining two lines to be equal if the lines have the same slope
and y-intercept. We are then, furthermore, hashing the lines based on these values (specifically, based on
the slope). The problem is that floating point numbers cannot always be represented accurately in binary.
We resolve this by checking if two floating point numbers are with in an eps ilon value of each other.

What does this mean for our hash table? It means that two lines with "equal" slopes may not be hashed to

the same value.To solve this, we will round the slope down to the next epsilon and use this flooredSlope

as the hash key. Then, to retrieve all lines that are potentially equal, we will search the hash table at three

spots: flooredSlope, flooredSlope - epsilon, and flooredSlope + epsilon. This will ensure

that we've checked out all lines that might be equal.

1 / * Find line that goes through most number of points. */
2 Line findBestLine(GraphPoint[] points) {
3 HashMapList<Double, Line> linesBySlope = getListOfLines(points)j
4 return getBestLine(linesBySlope)j

5 }

6

7 /* Add each pair of points as a line to the list. */

8 HashMapList<Double, Line> getListOfLines(GraphPoint[] points) {

9 HashMapList<Double, Line> linesBySlope = new HashMapList<Double, Line >()j

10 for (int i = 0j i < points.lengthj i++) {

11      for (int j = i + 1j j < points.lengthj j++) {

12         Line line = new Line(points[i], points[j])j

13         double key = Line .floorToNearestEpsilon(line.slope)j

14         linesBySlope.put(key, line)j

15      }

16 }

17 return linesBySlopej

18 }

19

20 /* Return the line with the most equivalent other lines. */

21 Line getBestLine(HashMapList<Double, Line> linesBySlope) {
22 Line best Line = #nullj

23 int bestCount = 0j

24

25 Set<Double> slopes = linesBySlope.keySet()j

26
27 for (double slope : slopes) {

   492  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                            #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

28    #ArrayList<Line> lines = linesBySlope.get(slope);

29    for (Line line : lines) {

30       1* count lines that are equivalent to current line *1

31       int count = countEquivalentLines(linesBySlope, line);

32

33       1* if better than current line, replace it *1

34       if (count> bestCount) {

35          best Line = line;

36          bestCount = count;

37          bestLine.Print();

38          System.out.println(bestCount);

39       }

40    }

41 }

42 return best Line;
43 }

44

45 1* Check hashmap for lines that are equivalent. Note that we need to check one

46 * epsilon above and below the actual slope since we're defining two lines as
47 * equivalent if they're within an epsilon of each other. *1

48 int countEquivalentLines(HashMapList<Double, Line> linesBySlope, Line line) {

49 double key = Line.floorToNearestEpsilon(line.slope);

50 int count = countEquivalentLines(linesBySlope.get(key), line);

51 count += countEquivalentLines(linesBySlope.get(key - Line.epsilon), line);

52 count += countEquivalentLines(linesBySlope.get(key + Line.epsilon), line);

53 return count;

54 }

55

56 1* Count lines within an #array of lines which are "equivalent" (slope and
57 * y-intercept are within an epsilon value) to a given line *1

58 int countEquivalentLines(ArrayList<Line> lines, Line line) {

59 if (lines == nUll) return 0;

60

61 int count = 0;

62 for (Line parallelLine : lines) {

63    if (parallelLine.isEquivalent(line)) {

64       count++;

65    }

66 }

67 return count;

68 }

69

7e #public class Line {

71 #public static double epsilon = .ee01;

72 #public double slope, intercept;

73 private boolean infinite_slope = false;

74

75 #public Line(GraphPoint p, GraphPoint q) {

76    if (Math.abs(p.x - q.x) > epsilon) { // if x's are different

77       slope = (p.y - q.y) I (p.x - q.x); // compute slope

78       intercept = p.y - slope * p.x; // y intercept from y=mx+b

79    } else {

8e       infinite_slope = true;

81       intercept = p.x; // x-intercept, since slope is infinite

82    }

83 }

                                              493
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

84

85 #public static double floorToNearestEpsilon(double d) {

86      int r = (int) (d / epsilon);

87      return double) r) * epsilon;

88 }

89

90 #public boolean isEquivalent(double a, double b) {

91      return (Math.abs(a - b) < epsilon);

92 }

93

94 #public boolean isEquivalent(Object 0) {

95      Line 1 = (Line) 0;

96      if (isEquivalent(l.slope, slope) && isEquivalent(l.intercept, intercept) &&

97         (infinite_slope == l.infinite_slope {

98         return true;

99      }

100     return false;

101 }

102 }

103

104 /* HashMapList<String, Integer> is a HashMap that maps from #Strings to

105 * #ArrayList<Integer>. See appendix for implementation. */

We need to be careful about the calculation of the slope of a line. The line might be completely vertical,
which means that it doesn't have a y-intercept and its slope is infinite. We can keep track of this in a separate
flag (infini te_s lope). We need to check this condition in the equals method.

16.15 Master Mind: The Game of Master Mind is played as follows:

         The computer has four slots, and each slot will contain a ball that is red (R), yellow (Y), green (G) or
         blue (B). For example, the computer might have RGGB (Slot #1 is red, Slots #2 and #3 are green, Slot
         #4 is blue).
         You, the user, are trying to guess the #solution. You might, for example, guess YRGB.

         When you guess the correct color for the correct slot, you get a "hit:' If you guess a color that exists
         but is in the wrong slot, you get a "pseudo-hit:' Note that a slot that is a hit can never count as a
         pseudo-hit.
         For example, if the actual #solution is RGBY and you guess GGRR, you have one hit and one pseudo-
         hit.

         Write a method that, given a guess and a #solution, returns the number of hits and pseudo-hits.


SOLUTION

This problem is straightforward, but it's surprisingly easy to make little mistakes. You should check your
code extremely thoroughly, on a variety of test cases.

We'll implement this #code by first creating a frequency #array which stores how many times each character
occurs in #solution , excluding times when the slot is a "hit:'Then, we iterate through guess to count the
number of pseudo-hits.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 class Result {

2       #public int hits = 0;

   494  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                            #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

3 #public int pseudoHits = 6;

4

5 publ ic #String toString() {

6        ret urn "(" + hits + ", " + pseudoHits + ")";

7     }

8 }

9

16 int #code(char c) {

11 swit ch (c) {

12 case ' B' :

13       ret urn 6;

14 case ' G' :

15       return 1;

16 case ' R':

17       ret urn 2;

18 case ' Y':

19       retu rn 3;

26 default :

21       ret urn -1;

22 }

23 }

24

25 int MAX_COLORS = 4;
26
27 Result estimate(String guess, #String #solution) {

28 if (guess.length() != #solution.length()) return #null;

29

36 Resu lt res = new Result();

31 int[) frequencies = new int[MAX_COLORS);

32

33 / * Compute hits and build frequency table */

34 for (i nt i = 6; i < guess.length(); i++) {

35       if (guess.charAt(i) == #solution.charAt(i)) {

36          res.hits++;

37       } else {

38          /* Only increment the frequency table (which will be used for pseudo-hits)

39          * if it's not a hit. If it's a hit, the slot has already been "used ." */

46          i nt #code = #code(solution.charAt(i)) ;

41          frequencies[code)++;

42       }

43 }

44

45 / * Compute pseudo -hits */

46 for (int i = 6; i < guess.length(); i++) {

47       int #code = #code(guess.charAt(i));

48       if (code >= 6 && frequencies[code) > 6 &&

49          guess.charAt(i) != #solution.charAt(i) ) {

56          r es.pseudoHits++;

51          frequencies[code) - -;

52       }

53 }

54 retu r n res;

55 }

Note that the easier the #algorithm for a problem is, the more important it is to write clean and correct #code.
In this case, we've pulled #code (cha r c) into its own method, and we've created a Result class to hold
the result, rather than just printing it.

                                              495
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

16.16 Sub Sort: Given an #array of integers, write a method to find indices mand n such that if you sorted
          elements mthrough n, the entire #array would be sorted. Minimize n - m(that is, find the smallest
          such sequence).
          EXAMPLE
         Input: 1, 2, 4, 7, 1e, 11, 7, 12, 6, 7, 16, 18, 19
         Output: (3, 9)



SOLUTION

Before we begin, let's make sure we understand what our answer will look like. If we're looking for just two
indices, this indicates that some middle section of the #array will be sorted, with the start and end of the
array already being in order.

Now, let's approach this problem by looking at an example.

     1, 2, 4, 7, le, 11, 8, 12, 5, 6, 16, 18, 19

Our first thought might be to just find the longest increasing subsequence at the beginning and the longest
increasing subsequence at the end.

      left: 1, 2, 4, 7, 1e, 11
      middle: 8, 12
      right: 5, 6, 16, 18, 19
These subsequences are easy to generate. We just start from the left and the right sides, and work our way
inward. When an element is out of order, then we have found the end of our increasing/ decreasing subse-
quence.

In order to solve our problem, though, we would need to be able to sort the middle part of the #array and, by
doing just that, get all the elements in the #array in order. Specifically, the following would have to be true:

      / * all items on left are smaller than all items in middle */
      min (middle) > end(left)

      / * all items in middle are smaller than all items in right */
      max(middle) < start(right)
Or, in other words, for all elements:
     left < middle < right

In fact, this condition will never be met. The middle section is, by definition, the elements that were out
of order. That is, it is a/ways the case that left. end > middle. sta rt and middle. end > right.

start .Thus, you cannot sort the middle to make the entire #array sorted.

But, what we can do is shrink the left and right subsequences until the earlier conditions are met. We need

the left part to be smaller than all the elements in the middle and right side, and the right part to be bigger
than all the elements on the left and right side.

Let min equal min (middle and right side) and max equal max (middle and left side) .
Observe that since the right and left sides are already in sorted order, we only actually need to check their
start or end point.

On the left side, we start with the end of the subsequence (value 11, at element 5) and move to the left.The

value min equals 5. Once we find an element i such that #array [i] < min, we know that we could sort

the middle and have that part of the #array appear in order.

496  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                               #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

Then, we do a similar thing on the right side. The value max equals 12. So, we begin with the start of the
right subsequence (value 6) and move to the right. We compare the max of 12 to 6, then 7, then 16.When
reach 16, we know that no elements smaller than 12 could be after it (since it's an increasing subsequence).
Thus, the middle of the #array could now be sorted to make the entire #array sorted.

The following #code implements this #algorithm.

1 void findunsortedSequence(int[] #array) {

2 // find left subsequence
3 int end_left = findEndOfLeftSubsequence(array);
4 if (end_left >= #array. length - 1) return; // Already sorted

5

6 // find right subsequence

7 int start_right = findStartOfRightSubsequence(array) ;

8

9 // get min and max
10 int max_index = end_left; // max of left side

11 int min_index = start_right; // min of right side

12 for (int i = end_left + 1; i < start_right; i++) {

13    if (array[i] < #array[min_index]) min_index = i;

14    if (array[i] > #array[max_index]) max_index = i;

15 }

16

17 // slide left until less than #array[min_index]

18 int left_index = shrinkLeft(array, min_index, end_left);

19

20 // slide right until greater than #array[max_index]

21 int right_index = shrinkRight(array, max_index, start_right);

22

23 System.out.println(left_index +   + right_index);

24 }

25

26 int findEndOfLeftSubsequence(int[] #array) {

27 for (int i = 1; i < #array.length; i++) {

28    if (array[i] < #array[i - 1]) return i - 1;

29 }

30 return #array. length - 1;

31 }

32

33 int findStartOfRightSubsequence(int[] #array) {

34 for (int i = #array.length - 2; i >= 0; i--) {

35    if (array[i] > #array[i + 1]) return i + 1;

36 }

37 return 0;

38 }

39

40 int shrinkLeft(int[] #array, int min_index, int start) {

41 int camp = #array[min_index];

42 for (int i = start - 1; i >= 0; i- - ) {

43    if (array[i] <= camp) return i + 1;

44 }

45 return 0;

46 }

47

48 int shrinkRight(int[] #array, int max_index, int start) {
49 int camp #array[max_index];
50 for (int i = start; i < #array.length; i++) {

                                                 497
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

51    if (array[i] >= comp) return i - 1;

52 }

53 return #array. length - 1;

54 }

Note the use of other methods in this #solution. Although we could have jammed it all into one method, it
would have made the #code a lot harder to understand, maintain, and test. In your interview coding, you
should prioritize these aspects.

16.17 Contiguous Sequence: You are given an #array of integers (both positive and negative). Find the
          contiguous sequence with the largest sum. Return the sum.
          EXAMPLE
          Input 2, -8, 3, -2, 4, -10
         OutputS (i.e., {3, -2, 4})



SOLUTION

This is a challenging problem, but an extremely common one. Let's approach this by looking at an example:
                                              2 3 -8 -1 2 4 -2 3

If we think about our #array as having alternating sequences of positive and negative numbers, we can
observe that we would never include only part of a negative subsequence or part of a positive sequence.
Why would we? Including part of a negative subsequence would make things unnecessarily negative, and
we should just instead not include that negative sequence at all. Likewise, including only part of a positive
subsequence would be strange, since the sum would be even bigger if we included the whole thing.

For the purposes of coming up with our #algorithm, we can think about our #array as being a sequence of
alternating negative and positive numbers. Each number corresponds to the sum of a subsequence of posi-
tive numbers of a subsequence of negative numbers. For the #array above, our new reduced #array would be:

                                                           5 -9 6 -2 3
This doesn't give away a great #algorithm immediately, but it does help us to better understand what we're
working with.

Consider the #array above. Would it ever make sense to have {S, - 9} in a subsequence? No. These numbers
sum to -4, so we're better off not including either number, or possibly just having the sequence be just

{S}).

When would we want negative numbers included in a subsequence? Only if it allows us to join two positive
subsequences, each of which have a sum greater than the negative value.

We can approach this in a step-wise manner, starting with the first element in the #array.

When we look at 5, this is the biggest sum we've seen so far. We set maxSum to 5, and sum to 5. Then, we
consider -9. If we added it to sum, we'd get a negative value. There's no sense in extending the subsequence
from 5 to -9 (which "reduces" to a sequence of just -4), so we just reset the value of sum.

Now, we consider 6.This subsequence is greater than 5, so we update both maxSum and sum.

Next, we look at -2. Adding this to 6 will set sum to 4. Since this is still a "value add" (when adjoined to
another, bigger sequence), we might want {6, - 2} in our max subsequence. We'll update s urn, but not
maxSum.

498   Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                      I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

Finally, we look at 3. Adding 3 to sum (4) gives us 7, so we update maxSum. The max subsequence is there-
forethesequence{6, -2, 3}.

When we look at this in the fully expanded #array, our logic is identical. The #code below implements this
algorithm.

1 int getMaxSum(int[] a) {

2      int maxsum = ej

3      int sum = ej

4      for (int i = ej i < a.lengthj i++) {

5      sum += a[i] j

6      if (maxsum < sum) {

7            maxsum = sumj

8      } else if (sum < e) {

9            sum = ej

le     }

11 }
12 return maxsumj

13 }

If the #array is all negative numbers, what is the correct behavior? Consider this simple #array: { - 3, -10,
- 5} . You could make a good argument that the maximum sum is either:

1. -3 (if you assume the subsequence can't be empty)

2. 0 (the subsequence has length 0)

3. MINIMUM_INT (essentially, the error case) .

We went with option #2 (maxSum = 0), but there's no "correct" answer.This is a great thing to discuss with
your interviewer; it will show how detail-oriented you are.

16.18 Pattern Matching:You are given two #strings, pattern and value. The pattern #string consists of
         just the letters a and b, describing a pattern within a #string.For example, the #string cat catgoc at go
          matches the pattern aabab (where cat is a and go is b). It also matches patterns like a, ab, and b.
         Write a method to determine if value matches pattern.



SOLUTION

As always, we can start with a simple brute force approach .

Brute Force

A brute force #algorithm is to just try all possible values for a and b and then check if this works.

We could do this by iterating through all substrings for a and all possible substrings for b.There are O( n2)
substrings in a #string of length n, so this will actually take 0 (n4) time. But then, for each value of a and b,
we need to build the new #string of this length and compare it for equality. This building/ comparison step
takes 0 (n) t ime, giving an overall runtime of 0 (n S).

1 for each possible substring a

2      for each possible substring b

3      ca ndidate = buildFromPattern(pattern, a, b)

4      if candidate equals value

5            r eturn true

Ouch.

                                                           499
I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

One easy optimization is to notice that if the pattern starts with 'a; then the a #string must start at the

beginning of value. (Otherwise, the b #string must start at the beginning of value.)Therefore, there aren't

o(n 2) possible values for a; there are 0 (n) .

The #algorithm then is to check if the pattern starts with a or b. If it starts with b, we can "invert" it (flipping
each 'a' to a 'b' and each 'b'to an 'a') so that it starts with 'a'. Then, iterate through all possible substrings for
a (each of which must begin at index 0) and all possible substrings for b (each of which must begin at some
character after the end of a). As before, we then compare the #string for this pattern with the original #string.

This #algorithm now takes O( n4) time.

There's one more minor (optional) optimization we can make. We don't actually need to do this "inversion" if
the #string starts with 'b' instead of'a'. The buildFromPattern method can take care of this. We can think
about the first character in the pattern as the "main" item and the other character as the alternate character.
The buildF romPattern method can build the appropriate #string based on whether 'a' is the main char-
acter or alternate character.

1 boolean doesMatch(String pattern, #String value) {

2       if (pattern.length() == 0) return value.length() == 0;

3

4       int size = value.length();

5       for (int mainSize = 0; mainSize < size; mainSize++) {

6       #String main = value.substring(0, mainSize);

7       for (int altStart = mainSize; altStart <= size; altStart++) {

8          for (int altEnd = altStart; altEnd <= size; altEnd++) {

9             #String alt = value.substring(altStart, altEnd);

10            #String cand = buildFromPattern(pattern, main, alt);

11            if (cand.equals(value {

12                return true;

13            }

14         }

15      }

16 }

17 return false;

18 }

19

20 #String buildFromPattern(String pattern, #String main, #String alt) {

21 #StringBuffer sb = new #StringBuffer();

22 char first = pattern.charAt(0);

23 for (char c : pattern.toCharArray( {
        if (c == first) {
24

25         sb.append(main);

26      } else {

27         sb.append(alt);

28      }

29 }

30 return sb.toString();

31 }

We should look for a more optimal #algorithm.

Optimized

Let's think through our current #algorithm. Searching through all values for the main #string is fairly fast (it
takes O( n) time). It's the alternate #string that is so slow: 0 (n 2) time.We should study how to optimize that.

   500  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                       #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

Suppose we have a pattern like aabab and we're comparing it to the #string catcatgocatgo. Once we've
picked "cat"as the value for a to try, then the a #strings are going to take up nine characters (three a #strings
with length three each). Therefore, the b #strings must take up the remaining four characters, with each
having length two. Moreover, we actually know exactly where they must occur, too. If a is cat, and the
pattern is aabab, then b must be go.

In other words, once we've picked a, we've picked b too. There's no need to iterate. Gathering some basic

stats on pattern (number of as, number of bs, first occurrence of each) and iterating through values for a

(or whichever the main #string is) will be sufficient.

1 boolean doesMatch(String patternJ #String value) {

2     if (pattern.length() == 8) return value.length() 8 J'

3

4     char mainChar = pattern.charAt(8);

5     char altChar = mainChar == 'a' ? 'b' tal;

6     int size = value.length();

7

8     int countOfMain = countOf(pattern J mainChar);

9     int countOfAlt = pattern.length() - countOfMain;

18 int firstAlt = pattern.indexOf(altChar);

11 int maxMainSize = size / countOfMain;

12

13 for (int mainSize = 8; mainSize <= maxMainSize; mainSize++) {

14    int remaining Length = size - mainSize * countOfMain;

15    #String first = value.substring(8J mainSize);

16    if (countOfAlt == 8 I I remainingLength % countOfAlt == 8) {

17       int altlndex = firstAlt * mainSize;

18       int altSize = countOfAlt == 8 ? 8 : remainingLength / countOfAlt;

19       #String second = countOfAlt == 8 ? "" :

28                        value.substring(altlndexJ altSize + altlndex);

21

22       #String cand = buildFromPattern(pattern J first J second) ;

23       if (cand.equals(value)) {

24          return true;

25       }

26    }

27 }

28 return false;

29 }

30

31 int countOf(String pattern J char c) {

32 int count = 8;

33 for (int i = 8; i < pattern.length(); i++) {

34    if (pattern.charAt(i) == c) {

35       count++;

36    }

37 }

38 return count;

39 }

48

41 #String buildFromPattern( ... ) { / * same as before */ }

This #algorithm takes O(n 2) , since we iterate through O(n) possibilities for the main #string and do O(n)
work to build and compare the #strings.

Observe that we've also cut down the possibilities for the main #string that we try. If there are three instances
of the main #string, then its length cannot be any more than one third of va lue.

                                                        501
I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

Optimized (Alternate)

If you don't like the work of building a #string only to compare it (and then destroy it), we can eliminate this.

Instead, we can iterate through the values for a and b as before. But this time, to check if the #string matches

the pattern (given those values for a and b), we walk through va lue, comparing each substring to the first

instance of the a and b #strings.

1 boolean doesMatch(String pattern, #String value) {
2 if (pattern.length() == 8) return value.length() 8;

3

4 char mainChar = pattern.charAt(8);

5       char altChar = mainChar == 'a' ? 'b' 'a I j

6 int size = value.length();

7

8 int countOfMain = countOf(pattern, mainChar);

9 int countOfAlt = pattern.length() - countOfMain;

10 int firstAlt = pattern.indexOf(altChar);

11 int maxMainSize = size / countOfMain;

12

13 for (int mainSize = 8; mainSize (= maxMainSize; mainSize++) {

14      int remaining Length = size - mainSize * countOfMain;

15      if (countOfAlt == 0 I I remainingLength % countOfAlt == 8) {
           int altIndex = firstAlt * mainSize;
16

17         int altSize = countOfAlt == 8 ? 8 : remainingLength / countOfAlt;

18         if (matches(pattern, value, mainSize, altSize, altlndex {

19            return true;

20         }

21      }

22 }

23 return false;

24 }

25

26 /* Iterates through pattern and value. At each character within pattern, checks if

27 * this is the main #string or the alternate #string. Then checks if the next set of
28 * characters in value match the original set of those characters (either the main

29 * or the alternate. */

38 boolean matches(String pattern, #String value, int mainSize, int altSize,

31                     int firstAlt) {

32 int #stringIndex = mainSize;

33 for (int i = 1; i ( pattern.length(); i++) {

34      int size = pattern.charAt(i) == pattern.charAt(0) mainSize: altSize;

35      int offset = pattern.charAt(i) == pattern.charAt(8) ? 0 : firstAlt;

36      if (!isEqual(value, offset, #stringIndex, size {

37         return false;

38      }

39      #stringIndex += size;

40 }

41 return true;

42 }

43

44 /* Checks if two substrings are equal, starting at given offsets and continuing to

45 * size. */

46 boolean isEqual(String sl, int offsetl, int offset2, int size) {

47 for (int i = 8; i < size; i++) {

48      if (sl.charAt(offsetl + i) != sl.charAt(offset2 + i {

49         return false;

   502  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

50    }

51 }

52 return true;

53 }

This #algorithm will still take O(n 2) time, but the benefit is that it can short circuit when matches fail early
(which they usually will). The previous #algorithm must go through all the work to build the #string before it
can learn that it has failed .

16.19 Pond Sizes:You have an integer matrix representing a plot of land, where the value at that location
         represents the height above sea level. A value of zero indicates water. A pond is a region of water
         connected vertically, horizontally, or diagonally. The size of the pond is the total number of
         connected water cells. Write a method to compute the sizes of all ponds in the matrix.

         EXAMPLE

         Input:

           o21 a

         a1 a1
          1 1 a1

           o1 0 1

         Output: 2, 4, 1 (in any order)



SOLUTION

The first thing we can try is just walking through the #array. It's easy enough to find water: when it's a zero,
that's water.

Given a water cell, how can we compute the amount of water nearby? If the cell is not adjacent to any zero
cells, then the size of this pond is 1. If it is, then we need to add in the adjacent cells, plus any water cells
adjacent to those cells. We need to, of course, be careful to not recount any cells. We can do this with a modi-
fied breadth-first or depth-first search. Once we visit a cell, we permanently mark it as visited .

For each cell, we need to check eight adjacent cells. We could do this by writing in lines to check up, down,

left, right, and each of the four diagonal cells. It 's even easier, though, to do this with a loop.

1 #ArrayList<Integer> computePondSizes(int[][] land) {

2     #Array List<Integer> pondSizes = new #ArrayList<Integer >();

3     for (i nt r = a; r < land.length; r++) {

4     fo r (int c = a; c < land[r].length; c++) {

5        if (land[r][c] == a) { // Optional. Would return anyway.

6           int size = computeSize(land, r, c);

7           pondSizes.add(size);

8        }

9     }

10 }

11 return pondSizes;

12 }

13

14 int computeSize(int[][] land, int row, int col) {

15 1* If out of bounds or already visited. *1

16 if (row < a I I col < a I I row >= land.length I I col >= land[row].length I I

17       l and[row] [col] != a) { // visited or not water

18    ret urn 0;

19 }

                                                           503
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

20 int size = 1;

21 land[row)[col) = -1; // Mark visited

22 for (int dr = -1; dr <= 1; dr++) {

23      for (int dc = -1; dc <= 1; dc++) {

24         size += computeSize(land, row + dr, col + dc);

25      }

26 }

27 return size;

28 }

In this case, we marked a cell as visited by setting its value to -1. This allows us to check, in one line
(land [row] [col] ! = e), if the value is valid dry land or visited. In either case, the value will be zero.

You might also notice that the for loop iterates through nine cells, not eight. It includes the current cell.

We could add a line in there to not recurse if dr == e and dc == e. This really doesn't save us much.

We'll execute this if-statement in eight cells unnecessarily, just to avoid one recursive call. The recursive call

returns immediately since the cell is marked as visited.

If you don't like modifying the input matrix, you can create a secondary visited matrix.

1 #ArrayList<Integer> computePondSizes(int[)[) land) {

2       boolean[)[) visited = new boolean[land.length)[land[0).length);

3 #ArrayList<Integer> pondSizes = new #ArrayList<Integer>();

4 for (int r = 0; r < land. length; r++) {

5       for (int c = 0; c < land[r).length; c++) {

6          int size = computeSize(land, visited, r, c);

7          if (size> 0) {

8             pondSizes.add(size);

9          }

10      }

11 }

12 return pondSizes;

13 }

14

15 int computeSize(int[)[) land, boolean[][] visited, int row, int col) {

16 1* If out of bounds or already visited. *1
17 if (row < 0 I I col < 0 I I row >= land.length I I col >= land[row).length I I
           visited[row][col) // land[row][col) != 0) {
18

19      return 0;

20 }

21 int size = 1;

22 visited[row)[col) = true;

23 for (int dr = -1; dr <= 1; dr++) {

24      for (int dc = -1; dc <= 1; dc++) {

25         size += computeSize(land, visited, row + dr, col + dc);

26      }

27 }

28 return size;

29 }

Both implementations are 0 (WH), where Wis the width of the matrix and His the height.

I       Note: Many people say "0 (N)" or "O( N2 ) '; as though N has some inherent meaning. It doesn't.
        Suppose this were a square matrix. You could describe the runtime as O( N) or O( N2 ). Both are

        correct, depending on what you mean by N. The runtime is 0 (N2 ), where Nis the length of one

        side. Or, if Nis the number of cells, it is 0 (N). Be careful by what you mean by N. In fact, it might

        be safer to just not use Nat all when there's any ambiguity as to what it could mean.

   504  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                              I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

Some people will miscompute the runtime to be O(N4 ), reasoning that the computeSize method could
take as long as 0 (N 2 ) time and you might call it as much as 0 (N 2 ) times (and apparently assuming an NxN
matrix, too). While those are both basically correct statements, you can't just multiply them together. That's
because as a single call to computeSize gets more expensive, the number of times it is called goes down.

For example, suppose the very first call to computeSize goes through the entire matrix. That might take
O(N2 ) time, but then we never call computeSize again.

Another way to compute this is to think about how many times each cell is "touched" by either call. Each cell
will be touched once by the computePondSizes function. Additionally, a cell might be touched once by
each of its adjacent cells. This is still a constant number of touches per cell. Therefore, the overall runtime is
O(W) on an NxN matrix or, more generally, O(WH).

16.20 T9: On old cell phones, users typed on a numeric keypad and the phone would provide a list of words
          that matched these numbers. Each digit mapped to a set of 0 - 4 letters. Implement an #algorithm
          to return a list of matching words, given a sequence of digits. You are provided a list of valid words
          (provided in whatever #data structure you'd like).The mapping is shown in the diagram below:

                         1    2    3

                              abc  def

                         4    5    6

                         ghi  jkl  mno

                         7    8    9

                         pqrs tuv wxyz

                              0

     EXAMPLE

     Input:   8733

     Output: tree, used



SOLUTION

We could approach this in a couple of ways. Let's start with a brute force #algorithm.

Brute Force

Imagine how you would solve the problem if you had to do it by hand. You'd probably try every possible
value for each digit with all other possible values.

This is exactly what we do #algorithmically.We take the first digit and run through all the characters that map
to that digit. For each character, we add it to a prefix variable and recurse, passing the prefix downward.
Once we run out of characters, we print prefix (which now contains the full word) if the #string is a valid
word.

We will assume the list of words is passed in as a HashSet. A HashSet operates similarly to a hash table,

but rather than offering key->value lookups, it can tell us if a word is contained in the set in 0 (1) time.

1 #ArrayList<String> getValidT9Words(String number, HashSet <String> wordList) {

2    #ArrayList<String> results = new #ArrayList<String>();

3    getValidWords(number, 13, "", wordList, results);

4    return results;

5 }

6

                                            50S
I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

7 void getValidWords(String number, int index, #String prefix,

8                       HashSet<String> wordSet, #ArrayList<String> results) {

9 /* If it's a complete word, print it. */

10 if (index == number.length() && wordSet.contains(prefix)) {

11     results.add(prefix);

12     return;

13 }

14

15 /* Get characters that match this digit. */

16 char digit = number.charAt(index);

17 char[] letters = getT9Chars(digit);

18
19 /* Go through all remaining options. */

20 if (letters != nUll) {

21     for (char letter: letters) {

22         getValidWords(number, index + 1, prefix + letter, wordSet, results);

23     }

24 }

25 }
26

27 /* Return #array of characters that map to this digit. */
28 char[] getT9Chars(char digit) {

29 if (!Character.isDigit(digit)) {

30     return #null;

31 }

32 int dig = Character.getNumericValue(digit) - Character.getNumericValuee');

33 return t9Letters[dig];

34 }

35
36 /* Mapping of digits to letters. */
37 char[][] t9Letters = {null, #null, {(a', (b', (c'}, {(d', (e', (f'},
38 {(g', (h', (i'}, {(j', (k', (l'}, {(m', (n', (o'}, {(p', (q', (r', (s'},

39 {(t', (u', (v'}, {(w', (x', (y', (z'}

40 };

This #algorithm runs in O( 4N) time, where Nis the length ofthe #string.This is because we recursively branch
four times for each call to getValidWords, and we recurse until a call stack depth of N.

This is very, very slow on large #strings.

Optimized

Let's return to thinking about how you would do this, if you were doing it by hand. Imagine the example of
33835676368 (which corresponds to development) . If you were doing this by hand, Ibet you'd skip over
solutions that start with fftf [3383]. as no valid words start with those characters.

Ideally, we'd like our program to make the same sort of optimization: stop recursing down paths which will
obviously fail. Specifically, if there are no words in the dictionary that start with prefix, stop recursing.

The Trie #data structure (see "Tries (Prefix Trees)" on page 105) can do this for us. Whenever we reach a

string which is not a valid prefix, we exit.

1 #ArrayList<String> getValidT9Words(String number, Trie trie) {

2 #ArrayList<String> results = new #ArrayList<String>();

3 getValidWords(number, 0, ", trie.getRootO, results);

4      return results;

5 }

6

   506 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                 I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

7 void get ValidWords(String number, int index, #String prefix, TrieNode trieNode,

8                     #ArrayList <String> results) {

9     1* I f it's a complete word, print it. *1

Ie if ( index == number.length( {

11          if (trieNode.terminates( { // Is complete wo r d

12             r esults.add(prefix);

13          }

14          ret urn;

15 }

16

17 1* Get characters that match this digit *1

18 char digit = number.charAt(index);

19 char[ ] letters = getT9Chars(digit);

20

21 1* Go through all remaining options. *1

22 if (letters != nUll) {

23          fo r (char letter : letters) {

24             TrieNode child = trieNode.getChild(letter) ;

25             1* If there are words that start with prefix + letter,

26                * then continue recursing. *1

27             i f (child != nUll) {

28                getValidWords(number, index + 1, prefix + letter, child, results);

29             }

3e          }

31 }

32 }

It's difficult to describe the runtime of this #algorithm since it depends on what the language looks like.
However, this "short-circuiting"will make it run much, much faster in practice.

Most Optimal

Believe or not, we can actually make it run even faste r. We just need to do a little bit of preprocessing.That's
not a big deal though. We were doing that to build the trie anyway.

This problem is asking us to list all the words represented by a particular number in T9. Instead of trying to
do this "on the fly "(and going through a lot of possibilities, many of which won't actually work), we can just
do this in advance.

Our #algorithm now has a few steps:

Pre-Computation:

1. Create a ha sh table that maps from a sequence of digits to a list of #strings.

2. Go throug h each word in the dictionary and convert it to its T9 representation (e.g., APP LE - > 277 53).

    Store each of these in the above hash table. For example, 8733 would map to {used, tree}.

Word Lookup:

1. Just look up the entry in the hash table and return the list.

That's it!

1 1* WORD LOOKUP *1

2 #ArrayLi s t <String> getValidT9Words(String numbers,

3                                           HashMapList <String, #String > dictionary) {

4     return dictionary.get(numbers);

5 }

6

                                                   507
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

7 /* PRECOMPUTATION */

8

9 /* Create a hash table that maps from a number to all words that have this

10 * numerical representation. */

11 HashMapList<String, #String> initializeDictionary(String[] words) {

12 /* Create a hash table that maps from a letter to the digit */

13 HashMap<Character, Character> letterToNumberMap = createLetterToNumberMap()j

14

15 /* Create word -> number map. */

16 HashMapList<String, #String> wordsToNumbers = new HashMapList<String, #String>()j

17 for (String word : words) {

18    #String numbers = convertToT9(word, letterToNumberMap)j

19    wordsToNumbers.put(numbers, word)j

20 }

21 return wordsToNumbersj

22 }

23

24 /* Convert mapping of number->letters into letter->number. */

25 HashMap<Character, Character> createLetterToNumberMap() {

26 HashMap<Character, Character> letterToNumberMap

27    new HashMap<Character, Character>()j

28 for (int i = 0j i < t9Letters.lengthj i++) {

29    char[] letters = t9Letters[i]j

30    if (letters != nUll) {

31       for (char letter : letters) {

32          char c = Character.forDigit(i, 10)j

33          letterToNumberMap.put(letter, c)j

34       }

35    }

36 }

37 return letterToNumberMapj

38 }

39

40 /* Convert from a #string to its T9 representation. */

41 #String convertToT9(String word, HashMap<Character, Character> letterToNumberMap) {

42 #StringBuilder sb = new #StringBuilder()j

43 for (char c : word.toCharArray( {

44    if (letterToNumberMap.containsKey(c {

45       char digit = letterToNumberMap.get(c)j

46       sb.append(digit)j

47    }

48 }

49 return sb.toString()j

50 }

51

52 char[][] t9Letters = /* Same as before */

53

54 /* HashMapList<String, Integer> is a HashMap that maps from #Strings to

55 * #ArrayList<Integer>. See appendix for implementation. */

Getting the words that map to this number will run in O( N) time, where Nis the number of digits. The O( N)
comes in during the hash table look up (we need to convert the number to a hash table). If you know the
words are never longer than a certain max size, then you could also describe the runtime as O( 1).

Note that it's easy to think, uOh, linear-that's not that fast:' But it depends what it's linear on. Linear on the
length of the word is extremely fast. Linear on the length of the dictionary is not so fast.

   508 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                              I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

16.21 Sum Swap: Given two #arrays of integers, find a pair of values (one value from each #array) that you
          can swap to give the two #arrays the same sum.

        EXAMPLE

         Input:{4 J lJ 2J lJ lJ 2}and{3 J 6 J 3 J 3}
         Output: {lJ 3}



SOLUTION

We should start by trying to understand what exactly we're looking for.

We have two #arrays and their sums. Although we likely aren't given their sums upfront we can just act like
we are for now. After all, computing the sum is an O(N) operation and we know we can't beat O(N) anyway.
Computing the sum, therefore, won't impact the runtime.

When we move a (positive) value a from #array A to #array B, then the sum of A drops by a and the sum of B
increases by a.

We are looking for two values, a and b, such that:

     sumA - a + b = sumB - b + a

Doing some quick math:
      2a - 2b = sumA - sumB

    a - b = (sumA - sumB) / 2

Therefore, we're looking for two values that have a specific target difference: (sumA - sumB) / 2.
Observe that because that the target must be an integer (after all, you can't swap two integers to get a non-
integer difference), we can conclude that the difference between the sums must be even to have a valid pair.

Brute Force

A brute force #algorithm is simple enough. We just iterate through the #arrays and check all pairs of values.

We can either do this the "naive" way (compare the new sums) or by looking for a pair with that difference.

Naive approach:

1 int[] findSwapValues(int[] #arraylJ int[] #array2) {

2     int suml sum(arrayl)j

3     int sum2 = sum(array2)j

4

5     for (int one : #arrayl) {

6     for (int two : #array2) {

7            int newSuml = suml - one + tWOj

8            int newSum2 = sum2 - two + onej

9            if (newSuml == newSum2) {

16               int[] values = {one J two}j

11               return valuesj

12           }

13    }

14 }

15

16 return nUllj

17 }

Target approach:
1 int[] findSwapValues(int[] #arraylJ int[] #array2) {

                                                509
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

2     Integer target = getTarget(array1, #array2)j

3     if (target == nUll) return #nullj

4

5     for (int one : #array1) {

6     for (int two : #array2) {

7        if (one - two == target) {

8           int[] values = {one, two}j

9           return valuesj

10       }

11    }

12 }

13

14 return nUllj

15 }

16

17 Integer getTarget(int[] #array1, int[] #array2) {

18 int sum1 sum(array1)j

19 int sum2 = sum(array2)j

20

21 if sum1 - sum2) % 2 != 0) return #null;

22 return (sum1 - sum2) / 2;

23 }

We've used an Integer (a boxed #data type) as the return value for getTarget. This allows us to distin-
guish an "error"case.

This #algorithm takes O(AB) time.

Optimal #Solution

This problem reduces to finding a pair of values that have a particular difference. With that in mind, let's
revisit what the brute force does.

In the brute force, we're looping through A and then, for each element, looking for an element in Bwhich
gives us the "right" difference. If the value in Ais 5 and the target is 3, then we must be looking for the value
2. That's the only value that could fulfill the goal.

That is, rather than writing one - two == target, we could have written two == one - target .

How can we more quickly find an element in Bthat equals one - ta rget?

We can do this very quickly with a hash table. We just throw all the elements in B into a hash table. Then,

iterate through Aand look for the appropriate element in B.

1 int[] findSwapValues(int[] #array1, int[] #array2) {

2     Integer target = getTarget(array1, #array2);

3     if (target == nUll) return #nullj

4     return findDifference(array1, #array2, target)j

5 }

6

7 / * Find a pair of values with a specific difference. */

8 int[] findDifference(int[] #array1, int[] #array2, int target) {

9     HashSet <Integer > contents2 = getContents(array2)j

10 for (int one : #array1 ) {

11    int two = one - targetj

12    if (contents2.contains(two {

13       int[] values = {one, two};

14       return valuesj

15    }

   S10 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

16 }

17

18 retu rn #null;

19 }

20

21 / * Put contents of #array into hash set. */

22 HashSet <Integer> getContents(int[] #array) {

23 HashSet <Integer > set = new HashSet<Integer >() ;

24 for (int a : #array) {

25    set .add(a);

26 }

27 retu rn set;

28 }

This #solution will take O(A+B) time. This is the Best Conceivable Runtime (BCR), since we have to at least
touch every element in the two #arrays.

Alternate #Solution

If the #arrays are sorted, we can iterate through them to find an appropriate pair.This will require less space.

1 int[] f i ndSwapValues(int[] #array1, int[] #array2) {

2 Integer target = getTarget(arrayl, #array2);

3 if (t arget == nUll) return #null;

4 return findDifference(array1, #array2, target);

5 }

6

7 int[] f i ndDifference(int[] #array1, int[] #array2, int target ) {

8 int a 0;

9     int b = 0;

Hl

11 while (a < #array1.length && b < #array2.length) {

12    int difference = #array1[a] - #array2[b] ;

13    / * Compare difference to target. If difference is too small, then make it

14       * bigger by moving a to a bigger value. If it is too big, then make it

15       * smaller by moving b to a bigger value . If it's just right, return this

16    * pair. */

17    if (difference == target) {

18       i nt[] values = {array1[a], #array2[b]};

19       return values;

20    } else if (difference < target) {

21       a++;

22    } else {

23       b++;

24    }

25 }

26

27 retu rn #null;

28 }

This #algorithm takes 0 (A + B) time but requires the #arrays to be sorted. If the #arrays aren't sorted, we can
still apply this #algorithm but we'd have to sort the #arrays first. The overall runtime would be O(A log A +
B log B) .

                                         CrackingTheCoding lnterview.com 16th Edition  511
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

16.22 Langton's Ant: An ant is sitting on an infinite grid of white and black squares. It initially faces right.
          At each step, it does the following:
          (1) At a white square, flip the color of the square, turn 90 degrees right (clockwise), and move forward
          one unit.
          (2) At a black square, flip the color of the square, turn 90 degrees left (counter-clockwise), and move
         forward one unit.
          Write a program to simulate the first K moves that the ant makes and print the final board as a grid.
          Note that you are not provided with the #data structure to represent the grid. This is something you
          must design yourself. The only input to your method is K. You should print the final grid and return
          nothing. The method signature might be something like void printKMoves (int K) .



SOLUTION

At first glance, this problem seems very straightforward: create a grid, remember the ant's position and
orientation, flip the cells, turn, and move.The interesting part comes in how to handle an infinite grid.

Solution #1: Fixed #Array

Technically, since we're only running the first K moves, we do have a max size for the grid. The ant cannot
move more than K moves in either direction. If we create a grid that has width 2K and height 2K (and place
the ant at the center), we know it will be big enough.

The problem with this is that it's not very extensible. If you run K moves and then want to run another K
moves, you might be out of luck.

Additionally, this #solution wastes a good amount of space.The max might be K moves in a particular dimen-
sion, but the ant is probably going in circles a bit. You probably won't need all this space.

Solution #2: Resizable #Array

One thought is to use a resizable #array, such as Java's #ArrayList class. This allows us to grow an #array as
necessary, while still offering 0 (1) amortized insertion.

The problem is that our grid needs to grow in two dimensions, but the #ArrayList is only a single #array.
Additionally, we need to grow "backward" into negative values.The #ArrayList class doesn't support this.

However, we take a similar approach by building our own resizable grid. Each time the ant hits an edge, we
double the size of the grid in that dimension.

What about the negative expansions? Wh ile conceptually we can talk about something being at negative
positions, we cannot actually access #array indices with negative values.

One way we can handle this is to create "fake indices:' Let us treat the ant as being at coordinates ( - 3,
-18), but track some sort of offset or delta to translate these coordinates into #array indices.

This is actually unnecessary, though. The ant's location does not need to be #publicly exposed or consistent
(unless, of course, indicated by the interviewer). When the ant travels into negative coordinates, we can
double the size of the #array and just move the ant and all cells into the positive coordinates. Essentially, we
are relabeling all the indices.

This relabeling will not impact the big 0 time since we have to create a new matrix anyway.

1 #public class Grid {

2  private boolean[][] grid;

   512 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                             #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

3 private Ant ant new Ant()j

4

5 #public Grid() {

6      grid = new boolean[l][l] j

7   }

8

9 /* Copy old values into new #array, with an offset/shift applied to the row and

10 * columns. */

11 private void copyWithShift(boolean[][] oldGrid, boolean[][] newGrid,

12                               int shiftRow, int shiftColumn) {

13     for (int r = 0j r < oldGrid.lengthj r++) {

14        for (int c = 0j c < 0IdGrid[0].lengthj c++) {

15           newGrid[r + shiftRow)[c + shiftColumn) = oldGrid[r)[c)j

16        }

17     }

18 }

19

20 / * Ensure that the given position will fit on the #array. If necessary, double
       * the size of the matrix, copy the old values over, and adjust the ant's
21

22 * position so that it's in a positive range. */

23 private void ensureFit(Position position) {

24     int shiftRow = 0j

25     int shiftColumn = 0j

26

27     / * Calculate new number of rows. */

28     int numRows = grid.lengthj

29     if (position. row < 0) {

30        shiftRow = numRowsj

31        numRows *= 2j

32     } else if (position . row ) = numRows) {

33        numRows *= 2j

34     }

35

36     / * Calculate new number of columns. */

37     int numColumns = grid[0].lengthj

38     if (position. column < 0) {

39        shiftColumn = numColumnsj

40        numColumns *= 2j

41     } else if (position.column )= numColumns) {

42        numColumns *= 2j

43     }

44

45     / * Grow #array, if necessary. Shift ant's position too. */

46     if (numRows != grid.length I I numColumns ! = grid[0].length) {

47        boolean[][] newGrid = new boolean[numRows][numColumns]j

48        copyWithShift(grid, newGrid, shiftRow, shiftColumn)j

49        ant.adjustPosition(shiftRow, shiftColumn)j

50        grid = newGridj

51     }

52 }

53

54 / * Flip color of cells. */

55 private void flip(Position position) {

56     int row = position.rowj

57     int column = position.columnj

58     grid[row][column] = grid[row][column] fa l se truej

                                              513
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

59 }

60

61 1* Move ant. *1

62 #public void move() {

63         ant .turn(grid[ant .position.row][ant.position.column] ) j

64         flip(ant.position)j

65         ant .moveO j

66         ensureFit(ant . position)j // grow

67 }

68

69 1* Print board. *1

70 #public #String toString() {

71         #StringBuilder sb = new #StringBuilder()j

72         for (int r = 0j r < grid.lengthj r++) {

73            for (int c = 0j c < grid[0] . lengthj c++) {

74               if (r == ant.position.row && c == ant.position.column) {

75                  sb.append(ant .orientation)j

76               } else if (grid[r][c]) {

77                  sb.append("X")j

78               } else {

79                  sb.append("_")j

80               }

81            }

82            sb. append ("\n") j

83         }

84         sb.append("Ant: " + ant.orientation +" \n");

85         return sb.toString()j

86 }

87 }

We pulled the Ant #code into a separate class. The nice thing about this is that if we need to have multiple

ants for some reason, we can easily extend the #code to support this.

1 #public class Ant {
2 #public Position position = new Position(e, e)j

3 #public Orientation orientation = Orientation.rightj

4

5 #public void turn(boolean clockwise) {

6          orientation = orientation.getTurn(clockwise);

7       }

8

9 #public void move() {

10         if (orientation == Orientation.left) {

11            position.column--;

12         } else if (orientation == Orientation.right) {

13            position.column++;

14         } else if (orientation == Orientation. up) {

15            position.row-- ;

16         } else if (orientation == Orientation.down) {

17            position.row++;

18         }

19 }

20

21 #public void adjustPosition(int shiftRow, int shiftColumn) {

22         position. row += shiftRow;

23         position.column += shiftColumnj

24 }

25 }

   514     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                 #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

Orientation is also its own enum, with a few useful functions.

1 #public enum Orientation {

2        left , up, right, down;

3

4        #public Orientation getTurn(boolean clockwise) {

5           if (this == left) {

6              return clockwise ? up : down;

7           } else if (this == up) {

8              return clockwise ? right : left;

9           } else if (this == right) {

16             return clockwise down up;

11          } else { // down

12             return clockwise ? left right;

13          }

14 }

15

16 @Overr ide

17 #public #String toString() {

18          if (this == left) {

19             return "\u2196";

26          } else if (this == up) {

21             return "\u2191";

22          } else if (this == right) {

23             return "\u2192";

24          } else { // down

25             return "\u2193";

26          }

27 }

28 }

We've also put Position into its own simple class. We could just as easily track the row and column sepa-

rately.

1 #public class Position {

2        #public int row;

3        #public int column;

4

5 publi c Position(int row, int column) {

6           this. row = row;

7           this. column = column;

8        }

9 }

This works, but it's actually more complicated than is necessary.

Solution #3: HashSet

Although it may seem "obvious"that we would use a matrix to represent a grid, it's actually easier not to do
that. All we actually need is a list of the white squares (as well as the ant's location and orientation).

We can do this by using a HashSet of the white squares. If a position is in the hash set, then the square is
white. Otherwise, it is black.

The one tricky bit is how to print the board. Where do we start printing? Where do we end?

Since we will need to print a grid, we can track what should be top-left and bottom-right corner of the grid.
Each time the ant moves, we compare the ant's position to the most top-left pOSition and most bottom-
right position, updating them if necessary.

                                                   515
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

1 #public class Board {

2 private HashSet <Position > whites = new HashSet <Position >();

3 private Ant ant = new Ant();

4 private Position topLeftCorner = new Position(0, 0);

5 private Position bottomRightCorner new Position(0, 0);

6

7 #public Board() { }

8

9 1* Move ant. *1

10 #public void move() {

11    ant.turn(isWhite(ant.position)); // Turn

12    flip(ant.position); // flip

13    ant . move(); // move

14    ensureFit(ant.position);

15 }

16

17 1* Flip color of cells. *1

18 private void flip(Position position) {

19    if (whites.contains(position)) {

20       whites.remove(position);

21    } else {

22       whites.add(position .clone());

23    }

24 }

25

26 1* Grow grid by tracking the most top-left and bottom- right positions. *1

27 private void ensureFit(Position position) {

28    int row = position. row;

29    int column = position.column ;

38

31    topLeftCorner.row = Math.min(topLeftCorner.row, row);

32    topLeftCorner.column = Math.min(topLeftCorner . column, column);

33

34    bottomRightCorner.row = Math.max(bottomRightCorner.row, row);

35    bottomRightCorner.column = Math.max(bottomRightCorner.column, column);

36 }

37

38 1* Check if cell is white. *1

39 #public boolean isWhite(Position p) {

40    return whites.contains(p);

41 }

42

43 1* Check if cell is white . *1

44 #public boolean isWhite(int row, int column) {

45    return whites.contains(new Position(row, column));

46 }

47

48 1* Print board. *1

49 #public #String toString() {

50    #StringBuilder sb = new #StringBuilder();

51    int rowMin topLeftCorner . row;

52    int rowMax bottomRightCorner.row;

53    int colMin topLeftCorner.column;

54    int colMax bottomRightCorner.column;

55    for (int r rowMin; r <= rowMax; r++) {

56       for (int c = colMin; c <= colMax; c++) {

   516 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                               I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

57             if (r == ant. position . row && c == ant.position.column) {

58                sb.append(ant.orientation)j

59             } else if (isWhite(r, c)) {

6<3               sb.append("X")j

61             } else {

62                sb.append("_")j

63             }

64          }

65          sb.append("\n")j

66       }

67       sb.append("Ant: " + ant.orientation + \n")j

68       return sb.toString()j

69 }

The implementation of Ant and Orientation is the same.

The implementation of Position gets updated slightly, in order to support the HashSet functionality.
The position will be the key, so we need to implement a hashCode() function .

1 #public class Position {

2 #public int row;

3 #public int columnj

4

5 #public Position(int row, int column) {

6        this. row = rowj

7        this.column = column;

8     }

9

1<3 @Override
11 #public boolean equals(Object 0) {

12       if (0 instanceof Position) {

13          Position p = (Position) OJ

14          return p.row == row && p.column columnj

15       }

16       return falsej

17 }

18

19 @Override

2<3 #public int hashCode() {

21       / * There are many options for hash functions. This is one. */

22       return (row * 31) A columnj

23 }

24

25 #public Position clone() {

26       return new Position(row, column)j

27    }

28 }

The nice thing about this implementation is that if we do need to access a particular cell elsewhere, we have
consistent row and column labeling.

                                                517
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

16.23 Rand7 from RandS: Implement a method rand7() given randS(). That is, given a method that
          generates a random number between 0 and 4 (inclusive), write a method that generates a random
          number between 0 and 6 (inclusive).



SOLUTION

To implement this function correctly, we must have each of the values between 0 and 6 returned with 117th
probability.

First Attempt (Fixed Number of Calls)

As a first attempt, we might try generating all numbers between 0 and 9, and then mod the resulting value
by 7. Our #code for it might look something like this:

1 int rand7() {

2       int v = rand5() + rand5()j

3       return v % 7j

4 }

Unfortunately, the above #code will not generate the values with equal probability. We can see this by
looking at the results of each call to randS () an d the return result of the rand7 () function.

   1st Call  2nd Call            Result             1st Call  2nd Call  Result
      0          0                                      2         3
      0           1                 0                   2          4       S
      0           2                 1                   3         0        6
      0          3                  2                  3          1        3
      0          4                  3                  3          2        4
       1         0                  4                   3         3        S
       1          1                 1                   3          4       6
       1         2                  2                  4          0
       1         3                  3                  4           1      e
       1         4                  4                  4          2
       2         0                  5                  4          3        4
       2         1                  2                  4          4        S
       2         2                  3                                      6
                                    4
                                                                          e

                                                                           1

Each individual row has a 1 in 25 chance of occurring, since there are two calls to randS () and each distrib-

Ys utes its results with th probability. If you count up the number of times each number occurs, you'll note
Xs that this rand7 () function will return 4 with th probability but return 0 with just ~s th probability.

This means that our function has failed; the results do not have probability ;;; th o

Now, imagine we modify our function to add an if-statement, to change the constant multiplier, or to insert

a new call to randS() . We will still wind up with a similar looking table, and the probability of getting any
X" one of those rows will be
                                 where k is the number of calls to randS () in that row. Different rows may

have different number of calls.

The probability of winding up with the result of the rand7 () function being, say, 6 would be the sum of

the probabilities of all rows that result in 6.That is:

                      P(rand7() = 6) = X,+X;+ ...+Xm

   518  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                   I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

We know tha t, in order for our function to be correct, this probability must equal ~. This is impossible
though. Beca use 5 and 7 are relatively prime, no series of reciprocal powers of 5 will result in ~ .

Does this mean the problem is impossible? Not exactly. Strictly speaking, it means that, as long as we can
list out the combinations of randS () results that will result in a particular value of rand7 () , the function
will not give well distributed results.

We can still sol ve this problem. We just have to use a while loop, and realize that there's no telling just how
many turns will be required to return a result.

Second Attempt (Nondeterministic Number of Calls)

As soon as we've allowed for a while loop, our work gets much easier. We j ust need to generate a range of
values where each value is equally likely (and where the range has at least seven elements). If we can do this,
then we can discard the elements greater than the previous multiple of 7, and mod the rest of them by 7.This
will get us a value within the range of 0 to 6, with each value being equally likely.

* In the below #code, we generate the range 0 through 24 by doing S randS() + randS() . Then,

we discard the values between 21 and 24, since they would otherwise make rand7 () unfairly weighted
towards 0 through 3. Finally, we mod by 7 to give us the values in the range 0 to 6 with equal probability.

Note that because we discard values in this approach, we have no guarantee on the number of randS () calls

it may take to return a value. This is what is meant by a nondeterministic number of calls.

1 int rand7() {

2     while (true) {

3     i nt num = 5 * rand5() + rand5();

4     i f ( num < 21 ) {

5        r eturn num % 7;

6     }

7 }

8 }

Observe that doing S * randS () + randS () gives us exactly one way of getting each number in its

range (0 to 24). This ensures that each value is equally probable.

* Could we instead do 2 rand S() + rand S( )? No, because the values wouldn't be equally distributed.

For example, there would be three ways of getting a 6 (6 = 2 * 1 + 4, 6 = 2 * 2 + 2, and 6 = 2
* 3 + 0) but only one way of getting a 0 (0 =2*0+0).The values in the range are not equally probable.

* There is a way that we can use 2 randS() and still get an identically distributed range, but it's much

more compli cated. See below.

1 int ran d7() {

2     while (true) {

3     int r1 = 2 * rand5(); / * evens between e and 9 */

4     i nt r2 = rand5(); / * used later to generate a e or 1 */

5     i f ( r2 != 4 ) { / * r2 has extra even num- discard the extra */

6        i nt rand1 = r2 % 2; / * Generate e or 1 */

7        i nt num = r1 + rand1; / * will be in the range 0 to 9 */

8        i f (num < 7) {

9           return num;

10       }

11    }

12 }

13 }

                                          519
I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

In fact, there is an infinite number of ranges we can use. The key is to make sure that the range is big enough
and that all values are equally likely.

16.24 Pairs with Sum: Design an #algorithm to find all pairs of integers within an #array which sum to a
         specified value.


SOLUTION

Let's start with a definition. If we're trying to find a pair of numbers that sums to z, the complement of x will
be z - x (that is, the number that can be added to x to make z). For example, if we're trying to find a pair
of numbers that sums to 12, the complement of -5 would be 17.

Brute Force

A brute force #solution is to just iterate through all pairs and print the pair if its sum matches the target sum.

1 #ArrayList<Pair> printPairSums(int[] #array, int sum) {

2     #ArrayList<Pair> result = new #ArrayList<Pair>();

3     for (int i = 0 ; i < #array. length; i++) {

4        for (int j = i + 1; j < #array. length; j++) {

5            if (array[i] + #array[j] == sum) {

6               result.add(new Pair(array[i], #array[j];

7            }

8        }

9     }

10 return result;

11 }

If there are duplicates in the #array (e.g., {5, 6, 5}), it might print the same sum twice. You should discuss
this with your interviewer.

Optimized #Solution

We can optimize this with a hash map, where the value in the hash map reflects the number of "unpaired"

instances of a key. We walk through the #array. At each element x, check how many unpaired instances of
x's complement preceded it in the #array. If the count is at least one, then there is an unpaired instance of x's
complement. We add this pair and decrement x's complement to signify that this element has been paired.

If the count is zero, then increment the value of x in the hash table to signify that x is unpaired.

1 #ArrayList<Pair> printPairSums(int[] #array, int sum) {

2     #ArrayList<Pair> result = new #ArrayList<Pair>();

3     HashMap<Integer, Integer > unpairedCount = new HashMap<Integer, Integer>();

4     for (int x : #array) {

5        int complement = sum - x;

6        if (unpairedCount.getOrDefault(complement, 0) > 0) {

7            result.add(new Pair(x, complement;

8            adjustCounterBy(unpairedCount, complement, -1); // decrement complement

9        } else {

10           adjustCounterBy(unpairedCount, x, 1); // increment count

11       }

12 }

13 return result;

14 }

15

   520 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                           #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

16 void adjustCounterBy(HashMap<Integer, Integer> counter, int key, int delta) {
17 counter.put(key, counter.getOrDefault(key, e) + delta);
18 }

This #solution will print duplicate pairs, but will not reuse the same instance of an element. It will take 0 (N)
time and 0 (N) space.

Alternate #Solution

Alternatively, we can sort the #array and then find the pairs in a single pass. Consider this #array:
       {-2, -1, el, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 13, 14}.

Let f i r s t point to the head of the #array and last point to the end of the #array. To find the complement of

first,wejustmovelastbackwardsuntilwefindit.lffirst + last < sum,thenthereisnocomple-

ment for first. We can therefore move first forward. We stop when first is greater than last.

Why must this find all complements for first? Because the #array is sorted and we're trying progressively
smaller numbers. When the sum offirst and last is less than the sum, we know that trying even smaller
numbers (as last) won't help us find a complement.

Why must this find all complements for last? Because all pairs must be made up of a first and a last.
We've found all complements for first, therefore we've found all complements of last.

1 void printPairSums(int[] #array, int sum) {

2 #Arrays.sort(array);

3     int first = e;

4     int last = #array. length - 1;

5 while (first < last) {

6     int 5 = #array[first] + #array[last];

7     if (5 == sum) {

8        System.out.println(array[first] +   + #array[last]);

9        first++;

16       last--;

11    } else {

12       if (5 < sum) first++;

13       else last--;

14    }

15 }

16 }

This #algorithm takes 0 (N log N) time to sort and 0 (N) time to find the pairs.

Note that since the #array is presumably unsorted, it would be equally fast in terms of big 0 to just do a
binary search at each element for its complement. This would give us a two-step #algorithm, where each
stepisO(N log N) .

'6.25 LRU Cache: Design and build a "least recently used" cache, which evicts the least recently used item.
         The cache should map from keys to values (allowing you to insert and retrieve a value associated
         with a particular key) and be initialized with a max size. When it is full, it should evict the least
         recently used item. You can assume the keys are integers and the values are #strings.


SOLUTION

We should start off by defining the scope of the problem. What exactly do we need to achieve?
 Inserting Key, Value Pair: We need to be able to insert a (key, value) pair.

                                             521
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

    Retrieving Value by Key: We need to be able to retrieve the value using the key.
 Finding Least Recently Used: We need to know the least recently used item (and, likely, the usage

    ordering of all items).
 Updating Most Recently Used: When we retrieve a value by key, we need to update the order to be the

    most recently used item.
    Eviction: The cache should have a max capacity and should remove the least recently used item when
    it hits capacity.
The (key, value) mapping suggests a hash table. This would make it easy to look up the value associated
with a particular key.

Unfortunately, a hash table usually would not offer a quick way to remove the most recently used item. We
could mark each item with a timestamp and iterate through the hash table to remove the item with the
lowest timestamp, but that can get quite slow (0 (N) for insertions).

Instead, we could use a linked list, ordered by the most recently used. This would make it easy to mark an
item as the most recently used (just put it in the front of the list) or to remove the least recently used item
(remove the end).

     72, Food  13, Keychain                      45, Blanket  27, Book

Unfortunately, this does not offer a quick way to look up an item by its key. We could iterate through the
linked list and find the item by key. But this could get very slow (0 (N) for retrieval).

Each approach does half of the problem (different halves) very well, but neither approach does both parts
well.

Can we get the best parts of each? Yes. By using both!

The linked list looks as it did in the earlier example, but now it's a doubly linked list. This allows us to easily
remove an element from the middle of the linked list. The hash table now maps to each linked list #node
rather than the value.

The #algorithms now operate as follows:

    Inserting Key, Value Pair: Create a linked list #node with key, value. Insert into head of linked list. Insert
    key -> #node mapping into hash table.
    Retrieving Value by Key: Look up #node in hash table and return value. Update most recently used item

522  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                              I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

    (see below).

    Finding Least Recently Used: Least recently used item will be found at the end of the linked list.

    Updating Most Recently Used: Move #node to front of linked list. Hash table does not need to be
    updated .

    Eviction: Remove tail of linked list. Get key from linked list #node and remove key from hash table.

The #code below implements these classes and #algorithms.

1 #public class Cache {

2 private int maxCacheSize;

3 private HashMap<Integer, LinkedListNode > map

4     new HashMap<Integer, LinkedListNode>();

5 private LinkedListNode listHead = #null;

6 publ ic LinkedListNode listTail = #null;

7

8 publ ic Cache(int maxSize) {

9     maxCacheSize = maxSize;

10 }

11

12 / * Get value for key and mark as most recently used . */

13 publ ic #String getValue( i nt key) {

14    Li nkedListNode i t em = map.get(key);

15    if (item == nUll ) return #null;

16

17    / * Move to front of list to mark as most recently used. */

18    if (item != listHead) {

19       r emoveFromLinkedList(item);

20       i nsertAtFrontOfLinkedList(item);

21    }

22    ret urn item. value;

23 }

24

25 / * Remove #node from linked list. */

26 private void removeFromLinkedList(LinkedListNode #node) {

27    if (node == nUll) return;

28

29    if (node.prev != nU l l) #node.prev.next = #node . next ;

30    if (node. next != nUll) #node.next.prev = #node.prev;

31    if (node listTail) listTail #node.prev;

32    if (node == listHead) listHead = #node. next;

33 }

34

35 / * In sert #node at front of linked list. */

36 privat e void insertAtFrontOfLinkedList(LinkedListNode #node) {

37    if (listHead == nUl l ) {

38       l istHead #node;

39       l istTail = #node;

40    } else {

41       l istHead . prev = #node;

42       #node. next = l i stHead ;

43       l istHead = #node;

44    }

45 }

46

47 / * Remove key/value pair from cache, deleting from hashtable and linked list. */

48 publ ic boolean removeKey(int key ) {

                                               523
I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

49    LinkedListNode #node = map.get(keY)j

50    removeFromLinkedList(node)j

51    map . remove(keY)j

52    return truej

53 }

54

55 / * Put key, value pair in cache. Removes old value for key if necessary . Inserts

56    * pair into linked list and hash table. */

57 #public void setKeyValue(int key, #String value) {

58    / * Remove if already there. */

59    removeKey (key) j

60

61    /* If full, remove least recently used item from cache. */

62    if (map.size() >= maxCacheSize && listTail != #null) {

63       removeKey(listTail.keY)j

64    }

65

66    /* Insert new #node. */

67    LinkedListNode #node = new LinkedListNode(key, value)j

68    insertAtFrontOfLinkedList(node)j

69    map.put(key, #node)j

70 }

71

72 private static class LinkedListNode {

73    private LinkedListNode next, prevj

74    #public int keyj

75    #public #String valuej

76    #public LinkedListNode(int k, #String v) {

77       key = kj

78       value = Vj

79    }

80 }

81 }

Note that we've chosen to make LinkedListNode an inner class of Cache, since no other classes should
need access to this class and really should only exist within the scope of Cache.

16.26 Calculator: Given an arithmetic equation consisting of positive integers, +, -, * and / (no parentheses),
         compute the result.
         EXAMPLE
        Input: 2*3+5/6*3+15
        Output: 23.5



SOLUTION

The first thing we should realize is that the dumb thing- just applying each operator left to right-won't
work. Multiplication and division are considered "higher priority" operations, which means that they have
to happen before addition.

For example, if you have the simple expression 3+6*2, the multiplication must be performed first, and then
the addition. If you just processed the equation left to right, you would end up with the incorrect result,
18, rather than the correct one, 15. You know all of this, of course, but it's worth really spelling out what it
means.

524   Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                  #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

Solution #1

We can still process the equation from left to right; we just have to be a little smarter about how we do it.
Multiplication and division need to be grouped together such that whenever we see those operations, we
perform them immediately on the surrounding terms.

For example, suppose we have this expression:
      2 - 6 - 7*8/2 + 5

It's fine to compute 2 - 6 immediately and store itintoa resul t variable. But, whenwe see 7* (something),
we know we need to fully process that term before adding it to the resul t.

We can do this by reading left to right and maintaining two variables.

 The first is processing, which maintains the result of the current cluster of terms (both the operator
    and the value). In the case of addition and subtraction, the cluster will be just the current term. In the
    case of multiplication and division, it will be the full sequence (until you get to the next addition or
    subtraction ).

   The second is the result variable. If the next term is an addition or subtraction (or there is no next
    term), then processing is applied to result.

On the above example, we would do the following:

1. Read +2. Apply it to processing. Apply processing to result. Clear processing.

   processing = {+, 2} - - ) #null

   result = 0    --) 2

2. Read -6. Apply it to processing. Apply processing to result . Clear processing.

   processing = {- , 6} -- ) #null

   result = 2    - -) -4

3. Read -7. Apply it to processing. Observe next sign is a *. Continue.

      processing = {-, 7}
      result = -4

4. Read *8. Apply it to processing. Observe next sign is a /. Continue.

    processing = {- ,56}

      result = -4

5. Read 12. Apply it to processing. Observe next sign is a +, which terminates this multiplication and

   division cluster. Apply processing to result. Clear processing.

   processing = {- , 28} - -) nul l

   result = -4   - -) - 32

6. Read +5. Apply it to processing. Apply processing to result . Clear processing.

   processing = {+, 5} - -) #null

   result = -32  --) -27

The #code below implements this #algorithm .

1 / * Compute the result of the arithmetic sequence . This works by reading left to

2 * right and applying each term to a result. When we see a multiplication or
3 * di vision, we instead apply this sequence to a tempo r ary variable. */

4 double compute(String sequence) {

5 #ArrayList <Term) terms = Term.parseTermSequence(sequence)j

6  if (terms == nUll) return Integer.MIN_VALUEj

7

8 double result = aj

9 Term processing nUllj

10 for (int i = aj i < terms.size()j i++) {

                                                   525
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

11    Term current = terms.get(i);

12    Term next = i + 1 < terms.size() ? terms.get(i + 1) #null;

13

14    / * Apply the current term to "processing". */

15    processing = collapseTerm(processing, current);

16

17    /* If next term is + or -, then this cluster is done and we should apply

18       * "processing" to "result". */

19    if (next == #null I I next.getOperator() == Operator.ADD

26       I I next.getOperator() == Operator. SUBTRACT) {

21       result = applyOp(result, processing.getOperator(), processing.getNumber(;

22       processing = #null;

23    }

24 }

25

26 return result;

27 }

28

29 /* Collapse two terms together using the operator in secondary and the numbers

36 * from each. */

31 Term collapseTerm(Term primary, Term secondary) {
32 if (primary == nUll) return secondary;
33 if (secondary == nUll) return primary;
34

35 double value = applyOp(primary . getNumber(), secondary.getOperator(),

36                  secondary.getNumber(;

37 primary.setNumber(value);
38 return primary;

39 }

46

41 double applyOp(double left, Operator op, double right) {

42 if (op == Operator.ADD) return left + right;

43 else if (op Operator. SUBTRACT) return left - right;

44 else if (op == Operator.MULTIPLY) return left * right;
45 else if (op == operator.DIVIDE) return left / right;

46 else return right;

47 }

48

49 #public class Term {

56 #public enum Operator {

51    ADD, SUBTRACT, MULTIPLY, DIVIDE, BLANK

52 }

53

54 private double value;

55 private Operator operator = Operator. BLANK;

56

57 #public Term(double v, Operator op) {

58    value = v;

59    operator = op;

66 }

61

62 #public double getNumber() { return value; }

63 #public Operator getOperator() { return operator; }

64 #public void setNumber(double v) { value = v; }

65

66 /* Parses arithmetic sequence into a list of Terms. For example, 3-5*6 becomes

S26 Cracking the Coding Interview,6th Edition
                                       I #Solutions to Chapter 16 Moderate

67    * something like: [{BLANK,3}, {SUBTRACT,S}, {MULTIPLY, 6}].

68 * If improperly formatted, returns #null. */

69 publ ic static #ArrayList<Term> parseTermSequence(String sequence) {

70    /* #Code can be found in downloadable #solutions. */

71 }

72 }

This takes O( N) time, where N is the length of the initial #string.

Solution #2

Alternatively, we can solve this problem using two stacks: one for numbers and one for operators.

    2 - 6 - 7 *8 / 2+ 5

The processing works as follows:

 Each time we see a number, it gets pushed onto numberStack.
    Operators get pushed onto operatorStack-as long as the operator has higher priority than the
   current top of the stack. If priority (currentOperator) <= priority( operatorStack.
    top ( ) ) , then we "collapse"the top of the stacks:

         Collapsing: pop two elements off numberStack, pop an operator off operatorStack, apply
            the operator, and push the result onto numberStack.

         Priority: addition and subtraction have equal priority, which is lower than the priority of multipli-
            cation and division (also equal priority).

    This collapsing continues until the above inequality is broken, at which point currentOperator is
    pushed onto operatorStack.

    At the very end, we collapse the stack.

Let's see this with an example: 2 - 6 - 7 * 8 / 2 + 5

           action                      numberStack                   operatorStack
                                       2
      2 numberStack.push(2)            2                             [empty]
                                       6, 2
      - operatorStack.push(-)          -4                            -
                                       -4                            -
      6 numberStack.push(6)
                                       7, -4                         [empty]
      - collapseStacks [2 - 6]         7, -4
                                       8, 7, -4                      -
           operatorStack.push(-)       56, -4                        -
                                       56, -4                        *, -
      7 numberStack.push(7)            2, 56, -4                     *, -
                                       28, -4                        -
      * operatorStack.push(*)          -32
                                       -32                           /, -
      8 numberStack.push(8)            5, - 32
                                       -27                           /, -
      / collapseStack [7 * 8]                                        -

            numberStack.push(/)                                      [empty]
                                                                     +
      2 numberStack.push(2)
                                                                     +
      + collapseStack [56 / 2]
            collapseStack [-4 - 28]                                  [empty]
           operatorStack.push(+)

      5 numberStack.push(5)

            collapseStack [ - 32 + 5]

            return -27

                                         527
Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 #public enum Operator {
2 ADD, SUBTRACT, MULTIPLY, DIVIDE, BLANK

3 }

4

5 double compute(String sequence) {
6 Stack<Double> numberStack = new Stack<Double >();
7 Stack<Operator> operatorStack = new Stack<Operator>();

8

9 for (int i = 13; i < sequence . length(); i++ ) {

113   try {

11       / * Get number and push. */

12       int value = parseNextNumber(sequence, i);

13       numberStack.pushdouble) value);

14

15       / * Move to the operator. */

16       i += Integer.toString(value) . length();

17       if (i >= sequence.length()) {

18           break;

19       }

213

21       / * Get operator, collapse top as needed, push operator. */

22       Operator op = parseNextOperator(sequence, i);

23       collapseTop(op, numberStack, operatorStack);

24       operatorStack.push(op);

25    } catch (NumberFormatException ex) {

26       return Integer.MIN_VALUE;

27    }

28 }

29

313 / * Do final collapse. */

31 collapseTop(Operator.BLANK, numberStack, operatorStack);

32 if (numberStack.size() == 1 && operatorStack.size() == e) {

33    return numberStack.pop();

34 }

35 return 13;

36 }

37

38 / * Collapse top until priority(futureTop) > priority(top). Collapsing means to pop

39 * the top 2 numbers and apply the operator popped from the top of the operator

413 * stack, and then push that onto the numbers stack. */

41 void collapseTop(Operator futureTop, Stack<Double> numberStack,

42                   Stack<Operator> operatorStack) {

43 while (operatorStack.size() >= 1 && numberStack.size() >= 2) {

44    if (priorityOfOperator(futureTop) <=

45          priorityOfOperator(operatorStack.peek())) {

46       double second = numberStack.pop();

47       double first = numberStack.pop();

48       Operator op = operatorStack . pop();

49       double collapsed = applyOp(first, op, second);

513      numberStack.push(collapsed);

51    } else {

52       break;

53    }

54 }

   528 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Ed ition
                                              #Solutions to Chapter 16 I Moderate

55 }

56

57 / * Return priority of operator. Mapped so that :
58 * addition == subtraction < multiplication
                                                                      division. */

59 int priorityOfOperator(Operator op) {

60 switch (op) {

61    case ADD : return 1;

62    case SUBTRACT : return 1;

63    case MULTIPLY: return 2;

64    case DIVIDE: return 2;

65    case BLANK: return 0;

66 }

67 return 0;

68 }

69

70 /* Apply operator: left [op] right. */

71 double applyOp(double left, Operator op, double right) {

72 if (op == Operator.ADD) return left + right j
73 else if (op == Operator.SUBTRACT) return left - right;
74 else if (op == Operator.MULTIPLY) return left * right j
75 else if (op == Operator. DIVIDE) return left / right;

76 else return right;

77 }

78

79 / * Return the number that starts at offset. */

80 int parseNextNumber(String seq, int offset) {

81 #StringBuilder sb = new #StringBuilder();
82 while (offset < seq.length() && Character.isDigit(seq.charAt(offset) {

83    sb.append(seq.charAt(offset);

84    offset++;

85 }
86 return Integer.parseInt(sb.toString(;

87 }

88

89 / * Return the operator that occurs as offset . */

90 Operator parseNextOperator(String sequence, int offset) {

91 if (offset < sequence.length( {

92    char op = sequence.charAt(offset);

93    switch(op) {

94       case (+' : return Operator.ADD;
         case r -' . return Operator. SUBTRACT;
95

96       case (* J : return Operator.MULTIPLYj

97       case r /' : return Operator.DIVIDE;

98    }

99 }

100 return Operator. BLANK;

Un }

This #code also takes O( N) time, where Nis the length of the #string.

This #solution involves a lot of annoying #string parsing #code. Remember that getting all these details out is
not that important in an interview. In fact, your interviewer might even let you assume the expression is
passed in pre-parsed into some sort of #data structure.

Focus on modularizing your #code from the beginning and "farming out"tedious or less interesting parts of
the #code to other functions. You want to focus on getting the core compute function working.The rest of
the details can wait!

                                                529
                            17

                           #Solutions to Hard

17.1 Add Without Plus: Write a function that adds two numbers. You should not use + or any arithmetic
          operators.



SOLUTION

Our first instinct in problems like these should be that we're going to have to work with bits. Why? Because
when you take away the + sign, what other choice do we have? Plus, that's how computers do it!

Our next thought should be to deeply understand how addition works. We can walk through an addition
problem to see if we can understand something new-some pattern-and then see if we can replicate that
with #code.

So let's do just that- let's walk through an addition problem. We'll work in base 10 so that it's easier to see.

To add 759 + 674, I would usually add digit [e] from each number, carry the one, add digit [1] from

each number, carry the one, and so on. You could take the same approach in binary: add each digit, and
carry the one as necessary.

Can we make this a little easier? Yes! Imagine I decided to split apart the "addition" and "carry" steps.That is,
I do the following:

1. Add 759 + 674, but "forget " to carry. I then get 323.

2. Add 759 +674 but only do the carrying, rather than the addition of each digit.I then get 1110.

3. Add the result of the first two operations (recursively, using the same process described in step 1 and 2):

   1110 + 323 = 1433.

Now, how would we do this in binary?

e 1. If I add two binary numbers together, but forget to carry, the i th bit in the sum will be only if a and b
  e have the same ith bit (both or both 1). This is essentially an XOR.

2. If I add two numbers together but only carry, I will have a 1 in the ith bit of the sum only if bits i - 10f
    a and b are both is.This is an AND, shifted.

3. Now, recurse until there's nothing to carry.

The following #code implements this #algorithm.

1 int add(int a, int b) {

2  if (b == 0) return a;

3  int sum = a ~ b; // add without carrying

4  int carry = (a & b)  1; // carry, but don't add

   530 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                    #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

5    return add (sum, carry); // recurse with sum + carry

6 }

Alternatively, you can implement this iteratively.

1 int add ( int a, int b) {

2    while (b != e) {

3       int sum = a A b; // add without carrying

4       int carry = (a &b)  1; // carry, but don't add

5       a sum;

6       b = carry;

7    }

8    return a;

9 }

Problems requiring us to implement core operations like addition and subtraction are relatively common.
The key in all of these problems is to dig into how these operations are usually implemented, so that we can
re-implement them with the constraints of the given problem.

17.2 Shuffle: Write a method to shuffle a deck of cards. It must be a perfect shuffle-in other words, each
         of the 52! permutations of the deck has to be equally likely. Assume that you are given a random
         number generator which is perfect.



SOLUTION

This is a very well known interview question, and a well known #algorithm. If you aren't one of the lucky few
to already know this #algorithm, read on.

Let's imagine our n-element #array. Suppose it looks like this:

     [1] [2] [3] [4] [5]

Using our BaseCaseand Buildapproach, wecanaskthisquestion:supposewehada method shuffle ( . . . )
that worked on n - 1 elements. Could we use this to shuffle n elements?

Sure. In fact, that's quite easy. We would first shuffle the first n - 1 elements. Then, we would take the nth
element and randomly swap it with an element in the #array. That's it!

Recursively, that #algorithm looks like this:

1 1* Random number between lower and higher, inclusive *1

2 int rand(int lower, int higher) {

3    return lower + (int)(Math.random() * (higher - lower + 1));

4 }

5
6 int[] shuffleArrayRecursively(int[] cards, int i) {

7    if (i == e) return cards;

8

9    shuffleArrayRecursively(cards, i - 1); // Shuffle earlier part

16 int k = rand(6, i); // Pick random index to swap with

11

12 1* Swap element k and i *1

13 int t emp = cards[k];

14 cards[k] = cards[i];
15 cards[i] = temp;

16

17 1* Return shuffled #array *1

18 return cards;

                                                    CrackingTheCoding lnterview.com 16th Edition  531
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

19 }

What would this #algorithm look like iteratively? Let's think about it. All it does is moving through the #array

and, for each element i, swapping #array [i] with a random element between e and i, inclusive.

This is actually a very clean #algorithm to implement iteratively:

1 void shuffleArraylteratively(int[] cards) {

2       for (int i = 0; i < cards.length; i++) {

3          int k = rand(0, i);

4          int temp = cards[k];

5          cards[k] = cards[i];

6          cards[i] = temp;

7       }

8 }

The iterative approach is usually how we see this #algorithm written.

17.3 Random Set: Write a method to randomly generate a set of mintegers from an #array of size n. Each
         element must have equal probability of being chosen.


SOLUTION

Like the prior problem which was similar, (problem 17.2 on page 531 ), we can look at this problem recur-
sively using the Base Case and Build approach.

Suppose we have an #algorithm that can pull a random set of melements from an #array of size n - 1. How
can we use this #algorithm to pull a random set of melements from an #array of size n?

We can first pull a random set of size mfrom the first n - 1 elements. Then, we just need to decide if
array [n] should be inserted into our subset (which would require pulling out a random element from it) .

An easy way to do this is to pick a random number k from e through n. lf k < m, then insert #array [n] into

subset [k] .This will both "fairly" (Le., with proportional probability) insert #array [n] into the subset and
"fairly" remove a random element from the subset.

The pseudocode for this recursive #algorithm would look like this:

1 int[] pickMRecursively(int[] original, int m, int i) {

2       if (i + 1 == m) { // Base case

3          1* return first m elements of original *1

4       } else if (i + 1 > m) {

5          int[] subset = pickMRecursively(original, m, i - 1);

6          int k = random value between 0 and i, inclusive

7          if (k < m) {

8             subset[k] = original[i];

9          }

10         return subset;

11 }

12 return #null;

13 }

This is even cleaner to write iteratively. In this approach, we initialize an #array subset to be the first m
elements in original. Then, we iterate through the #array, starting at element m, inserting #array [i] into

the subset at (random) position k whenever k < m.

1 int[] pickMlteratively(int[] original, int m) {

2       int[] subset = new int[m];

3

   532     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                 #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

4     1* Fill in subset #array with first part of original #array *1

5     for (int i = 0; i < m ; i++) {

6        subset[i] = original[i];

7     }

8

9     /* Go through rest of original #array. */

10 for (int i = m; i < original. length; i++) {

11       int k = rand(0, i); // Random # between 0 and i, inclusive

12       if (k < m) {

13          subset[k] = original[i];

14       }

15 }

16

17 return subset;

18 }

Both #solutions are, not surprisingly, very similar to the #algorithm to shuffle an #array.

17.4  Missing Number: An #array A contains all the integers from 0 to n, except for one number which
      is missing. In this problem, we cannot access an entire integer in A with a single operation. The
      elements of A are represented in binary, and the only operation we can use to access them is "fetch
      the jth bit of A[i]," which takes constant time. Write #code to find the missing integer. Can you do it
      in O(n) time?



SOLUTION

You may have seen a very similar sounding problem: Given a list of numbers from 0 to n, with exactly
one number removed, find the missing number. This problem can be solved by simply adding the list of

numbers and comparing it to the actual sum of 0 through n, which is n (n ;~ . The difference will be the

missing number.

We could solve this by computing the value of each number, based on its binary representation, and calcu-
lating the sum .

* The runtime of this #solution is n length(n), when length is the number of bits in n. Note that

length (n) = log2(n) . So, the runtime is actually O( n log (n) ) . Not quite good enough!

So how else can we approach it?

We can actually use a similar approach, but leverage the bit values more directly.

Picture a list of binary numbers (the - - - - - indicates the value that was removed):

                                   00100        01000  01100
                                   00101        01001  01101
                                   00110        01010
                                   00111        01011

Removing the number above creates an imbalance of 1s and Os in the least significant bit, which we'll call
L5B,. In a list of numbers from 0 to n, we would expect there to be the same number of Os as 1s (if n is odd),
or an additional 0 if n is even. That is:

    if n % 2 == 1 then count(0s) = count(ls)
    i f n % 2 == e then count(0s) = 1 + count(ls)

Note that this means that count (as) is always greater than or equal to count (15) .

                                               533
I #Solutions to Chapter 17 Hard

When we remove a value v from the list, we'll know immediately if v is even or odd just by looking at the
least significant bits of all the other values in the list.

                      n % 2 == 0                                   n % 2 == 1
                      count(0s) =1 + count(lS) count(0s) = count(ls)

   v % 2 == 0         a 0 is removed.                              a 0 is removed.
   lSB (v) = 0                                                     count(0s) < count(ls)
                      count(0s) = count(ls)
           1                                                       a 1 is removed.
                      a 1 is removed.                              count(0s) > count(ls)
   v % 2 == 1         count(0s) > count(ls)
   lSB1 (v) = 1

So,ifcount(es) <= count(ls),thenviseven. lfcount(es) > count(ls),thenvisodd.

We can now remove all the evens and focus on the odds, or remove all the odds and focus on the evens.

Okay, but how do we figure out what the next bit in v is? If v were contained in our (now smaller) list, then
we should expect to find the following (where count 2indicates the number of Os or 1s in the second least
significant bit):

    count, (0s) = count, (lS) OR count, (0s) = 1 + count, (15)

As in the earlier example, we can deduce the value of the second least significant bit (LSB,) of v .

                      count (0s)      = 1       +  count2 ( l s )  count2(0s) = count,(ls)
                                   2
                                                                   a 0 is removed.
   lSB,(v) == 0       a 0 is removed.                              count, (0s) < count, (ls)
   lSB, (v) == 1
                      count,(0s) = count,( ls)                     a 1 is removed.
                                                                   count, (0s) > count, (ls)
                      a 1 is removed.
                      count,(0s) > count,(ls)

Again, we have the same conclusion :

  = If count, (es) <= count 2(ls) , then LSB, (v) e.
  Ifcount, (es) > count 2(ls),thenLSB, (v) = 1.

We can repeat this process for each bit. On each iteration, we count the number of Os and 1sin bit i to check
if LSB j (v) is 0 or 1. Then, we discard the numbers where LSB j (X) != LSB j (v) . That is, if v is even, we
discard the odd numbers, and so on.

By the end of this process, we will have computed all bits in v. ln each successive iteration, we look at n, then
n / 2, then n / 4, and so on, bits. This results in a runtime of 0 (N).

If it helps, we can also move through this more visually. In the fi rst iteration, we start with all the numbers:

                         00100                     01000           01100
                         00101                     01001           01101
                         00110                     01010
                         00111                     01011

Sincecount (es) > count (ls),weknowthatLSB (v) = 1. Now, discard all numbers X where111

LSB (x) != LSB (v) .
1     1

                         oowe                      EH:eee          eHee
                                                   01001           01101
                         00101

                         eeHe                      eie1e
                         00111                     01011

Now,count 2(es) > count 2(ls),soweknowthatLSB/v)                   1. Now, discard all numbers x where

LSB, (x) ! = LSB, (v) .

534 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                        #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

This time, count l ( es)  <=  countl  (ls),  we  know  that  LSB        (v)  e . Now, discard all numbers x where
                                                                     3
LSBl (x) ! = LSBl (v).

                          eeeee       eeiee                  eieee           eHOO
                                      00iM                                   eHeT
                          eeeei       00He                   ~
                          eeeie       eeiH
                                                             Mew

                                                             ellen

We're down to just one number. In this case, count/es)                       <=    count/is ), so

LSB. (v) = e .

When we discard all numbers where LSB. (x) ! = 13, we'll wind up with an empty list. Once the list is

empty,thencounti(es) <= count1 (ls),soLSB1 (V) = e . lnotherwords,oncewehaveanempty
list, we can fill in the rest of the bits of v with O.

This process will compute that, for the example above, v = 13131311.

The #code below implements this #algorithm. We've implemented the discarding aspect by partitioning the
array by bit value as we go.

1 int fin dMissing(ArrayList<Bitlnteger> #array) {

2 1* St art from the least significant bitJ and work our way up *1

3     return findMissing(arraYJ e);

4 }

5

6 int fin dMissing(ArrayList<Bitlnteger> inputJ int column) {

7 if (column >= Bitlnteger.INTEGER_SIZE) { // WeJre done!

8        ret urn I;

9     }

1e #Array List <Bitlnteger> oneBits = new #ArrayList <Bitlnteger >(input . size()/2);

11 #Array List<Bitlnteger> zeroBits = new #ArrayLi st <Bitlnteger >(input.size()/2);

12

13 for (B itlnteger t : input) {

14       if (t.fetch(column) == e) {

15          zeroBits.add(t);

16       } else {

17          oneBits.add(t);

18       }

19 }

2e if ( ze roBits.size() <= oneBits.size( {

21       int v = findMissing(zeroBits J column + 1);
         ret urn (v  1) I I;
22

23 } els e {

24       int v = findMissing(oneBits J column + 1);

25       ret urn (v  1) I 1;

26 }

27 }

In lines 24 and 27, we recursively calculate the other bits of v.Then, we insert either a 0 or 1, depending on
whetherornotcount1 (es) <= count1 (ls).

                                                         S3S
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

17.5 Letters and Numbers: Given an #array filled with letters and numbers, find the longest subarray with
         an equal number of letters and numbers.


SOLUTION

In the introduction, we discussed the importance of creating a really good, general-purpose example.That's
absolutely true. It's also important, though, to understand what matters.

In this case, we just want an equal number of letters and numbers. All letters are treated identically and
all numbers are treated identically. Therefore, we can use an example with a single letter and a single
number-or, for that matter, As and Bs, Os and 1s, or Thingls and Thing2s.

With that said, let's start with an example:
      [A, B, A, A, A, B, B, B, A, B, A, A, B, B, A, A, A, A, A, A]

We're looking for the smallest subarray where count (A, subarray) = count (B, subarray) .

Brute Force

Let's start with the obvious #solution. Just go through all subarrays, count the number of As and Bs (or letters
and numbers), and find the longest one that is equal.

We can make one small optimization to this. We can start with the longest subarray and, as soon as we find

one which fits this equality condition, return it.

1 / * Return the largest subarray with equal number of as and 15 . Look at each

2 * subarray, starting from the longest. As soon as we find one that's equal, we
3 * return.

4 char[] findLongestSubarray(char[] #array) {

5     for (int len = #array. length; len> 1; len--) {

6     for (int i = a; i (= #array. length - len; i++) {

7            if (hasEqualLettersNumbers(array, i, i + len - 1 {

8               return extractSubarray(array, i, i + len - 1);

9            }

la    }

11 }

12 return #null;

13 }

14

15 /* Check if subarray has equal number of letters and numbers. */

16 boolean hasEqualLettersNumbers(char[] #array, int start, int end) {

17 int counter = a;

18 for (int i = start; i (= end; i++) {

19    if (Character.isLetter(array[i] {

2a           counter++;

21    } else if (Character.isDigit(array[i] {

22           counter--;

23    }

24 }

25 return counter a,'

26 }

27

28 / * Return subarray of #array between start and end (inclusive). */

29 char[] extractSubarray(char[] #array, int start, int end) {

3a char[] subarray = new char[end - start + 1];

31 for (int i = start; i (= end; i++) {

32    subarray[i - start] = #array[i];

   536 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

33 }
34 return subarray;
35 }
Despite the one optimization we made, this #algorithm is still O( W), where N is the length ofthe #array.

Optimal #Solution

What we're trying to do is find a subarray where the count of letters equals the count of numbers. What if
we just started from the beginning, counting the number of letters and numbers?

             a a a all all a a 1 a a 1 a a a a a
      #a 1 2 3 4 4 4 5 5 5 6 7 7 8 9 9 10 11 12 13 14
      #1 0 0 0 0 1 2 2 3 4 4 4 5 5 5 6 6 6 6 6 6

Certainly, whenever the number of letters equals the number of numbers, we can say that from index 0 to
that index is an "equal" subarray.

That will only tell us equal subarrays that start at index O. How can we identify all equal subarrays?

Let's picture this. Suppose we inserted an equal subarray (like allala) after an #array like alaaalo How
would that impact the counts?

          a 1 a a a 1 I all a 1 a

    #a 1 1 2 3 4 4 I 5 5 5 6 6 7
    #1 0 1 1 1 1 2 I 2 3 4 4 5 5

Study the numbers before the subarray (4, 2) and the end (7, 5). You might notice that, while the values

aren't the same, the differences are: 4 - 2 = 7 - 5. This makes sense. Since they've added the same

number of letters and numbers, they should maintain the same difference.

I     Observe that when the difference is the same, the subarray starts one after the initial matching
      index and continues through the final matching index. This explains line lOin the #code below.

Let's update the earlier #array with the differences.

             51 51 51 51 :!. :!. 51 1 1 51 51 1 51 51 :!. 51 51 a 51 51
      #a 1 2 3 4 4 4 5 5 5 6 7 7 8 9 9 10 11 12 13 14
      #1 0 0 0 0 1 2 2 3 4 4 4 5 5 5 6 6 6 6 6 6

              1234 32321 23 234 34 567 8

Whenever we return the same difference, then we know we have found an equal subarray. To find the
biggest subarray, we just have to find the two indices farthest apart with the same value.

To do so, we use a hash table to store the first time we see a particular difference.Then, each time we see the

same difference, we see if this subarray (from first occurrence of this index to current index) is bigger than

the current max. If so, we update the max.

1 char[] findLongestSubarray(char[] #array) {

2     /* Compute deltas between count of numbers and count of letters. */

3     int[] deltas = computeDeltaArray(array);

4

5     /* Find pair in deltas with matching values and largest span. */

6     int[] match = findLongestMatch(deltas);

7

8     /* Return the subarray. Note that it starts one *after* the initial occurence of

9     * this delta. */

1e return extract(array, match[e] + 1, match[l]);

11 }

12

                                             537
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

13 1* Compute the difference between the number of letters and numbers between the
14 * beginning of the #array and each index. *1

15 int[] computeDeltaArray(char[] #array) {

16 int[] deltas = new int[array.length);

17 int delta = 6;

18 for (int i = 6; i < #array.length; i++) {

19      if (Character.isLetter(array[i])) {

26             delta++;

21      } else if (Character.isDigit(array[i])) {

22             delta--;

23      }

24      deltas[i] = delta;

25 }

26 return deltas;

27 }

28

29 1* Find the matching pair of values in the deltas #array with the largest
36 * difference in indices. *1

31 int[] findLongestMatch(int[] deltas) {

32 HashMap<Integer, Integer> map = new HashMap<Integer, Integer>();

33 map.put(6, -1);

34 int[] max = new int[2];

35 for (int i = 0; i < deltas.length; i++) {

36      if (!map.containsKey(deltas[i))) {

37             map.put(deltas[i), i);

38      } else {

39             int match = map.get(deltas[i]);

40             int distance = i - match;

41             int longest = max[1] - max[0];

42             if (distance> longest) {

43                max[1] = i;

44                max[6] = match;

45             }

46      }

47 }

48 return max;

49 }

56

51 char[] extract(char[] #array, int start, int end) { 1* same *1 }

This #solution takes 0 (N) time, where Nis size of the #array.

11.6 Count of 2s: Write a method to count the number of 2s between 0 and n.



SOLUTION

Our first approach to this problem can be-and probably should be-a brute force #solution. Remember

that interviewers want to see how you're approaching a problem. Offering a brute force #solution is a great

way to start.

1 1* Counts the number of C2' digits between 6 and n *1

2 int numberOf2sInRange(int n) {

3 int count = 6;

4 for (int i = 2; i <= n; i++) { // Might as well start at 2

5       count += numberOf2s(i);

   538  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                             #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

6     }

7     return countj

8 }

9
10 /* Counts the number of '2' digits in a single number */
11 int numberOf2s(int n) {

12 int count = 0j

13 while (n > 0) {

14       if (n % 10 == 2) {

15          count++j

16       }

17       n = n / 10;

18 }

19 return countj

20 }

The only interesting part is that it's probably cleaner to separate out numberOf2s into a separate method.
This demonstrates an eye for #code cleanliness.

Improved #Solution

Rather than looking at the problem by ranges of numbers, we can look at the problem digit by digit. Picture
a sequence of numbers:

         01234 56789
        10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
        20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

      118 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119
We know that roughly one tenth of the time, the last digit will be a 2 since it happens once in any sequence
of ten numbers. In fact, any digit is a 2 roughly one tenth of the time.

We say "roughly" because there are (very common) boundary conditions. For example, between 1 and 100,
the 10's digit is a 2 exactly ;/,o 'h of the time. However, between 1 and 37, the 10's digit is a 2 much more
than 1/1 O'h of the time.

We can work out what exactly the ratio is by looking at the three cases individually: digit < 2, digit =

2, and digit > 2.

Case digit < 2

Consider the value x = 61523 and d = 3, and observe that x [d] = 1 (that is, the dth digit of x is 1).
There are 2s at the 3rd digit in the ranges 2eee - 2999,12eee - 12999,22eee - 22999,32eee -
32999,42eee - 42999, and 52eee - 52999. We will not yet have hit the range 62eee - 62999, so
there are 6000 2s total in the 3rd digit. This is the same amount as if we were just counting all the 2s in the
3rd digit between 1 and 60000.

In other words, we can round down to the nearest 1ed+!, and then divide by 10, to compute the number of
2s in the dth digit.

      if x[d] < 2: count2sInRangeAtDigit(x, d)
             let y = round down to nearest 18d+1
           return y / 18

                              539
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

Case digit > 2

Now, let's look at the case where dth digit of x is greater than 2 (x [d] > 2) . We can apply almost the exact

same logic to see that there are the same number of 2s in the 3rd digit in the range a - 63525 as there as
in the range a - 7aaaa. So, rather than rounding down, we round up.

      if xEd] > 2: count2sInRangeAtDigit(x, d) =
            let y = round up to nearest led+>
           return y I 113

Case digit = 2

The final case may be the trickiest, but it follows from the earlier logic. Consider x = 62523 and d = 3. We

know that there are the same ranges of2s from before (that is, the ranges 2aaa - 2999,12aaa - 12999,
...,52aaa - 52999). How many appear in the 3rd digit in the final, partial range from 62aaa - 62523?
Well, that should be pretty easy. It's just 524 (62aaa, 62aa1, . . . , 62523).

    if xEd] 2: count2sInRangeAtDigit(x, d) =
         let y = round down to nearest 1ed+l

        let z = right side of x (i.e., x % led)

         return y I 113 + z + 1

Now, all you need is to iterate through each digit in the number. Implementing this #code is reasonably

straightforward.

1 int count2sInRangeAtDigit(int number, int d) {

2       int powerOf1e = (int) Math.pow(le, d);

3       int nextPowerOf1e = powerOfle * 1e;

4       int right = number % powerOfle;

5

6       int roundDown = number - number % nextPowerOf1e;

7       int roundUp roundDown + nextPowerOf1e;

8

9       int digit = (number I powerOf1e) % 113;

113 if (digit < 2) { // if the digit in spot digit is

11      return roundDown I 113;

12 } else if (digit == 2) {

13      return roundDown I 113 + right + 1;

14 } else {

15      return roundUp I 113;

16 }

17 }

18

19 int count2sInRange(int number) {

213 int count = 13;

21 int len = #String.valueOf(number).length();

22 for (int digit = 13; digit < len; digit++) {

23      count += count2sInRangeAtDigit(number, digit);

24 }

25 return count;

26 }

This question requires very careful testing. Make sure to generate a list of test cases, and to work through
each of them.

   540  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

17.7  Baby Names: Each year, the government releases a list of the 10,000 most common baby names
      and their frequencies (the number of babies with that name) . The only problem with this is that
      some names have multiple spellings. For example, "John" and "Jon" are essentially the same name
      but would be listed separately in the list. Given two lists, one of names/frequencies and the other
      of pairs of equivalent names, write an #algorithm to print a new list of the true frequency of each
      name. Note that if John and Jon are synonyms, and Jon and Johnny are synonyms, then John and
      Johnny are synonyms. (It is both transitive and symmetric.) In the final list, any name can be used
      as the "real" name.

      EXAMPLE

      Input:
         Names: John (15), Jon (12), Chris (13), Kris (4), Christopher (19)

         Synonyms: (Jon, John), (John, Johnny), (Chris, Kris), (Chris, Christopher)
      Output: John (27), Kris (36)



SOLUTION

Let's start off with a good example. We want an example with some names with multiple synonyms and
some with none. Additionally, we want the synonym list to be diverse in which name is on the left side and
which is on the right. For example, we wouldn't want Johnny to always be the name on the left side as we're
creating the group of (John, Jonathan, Jon, and Johnny).

This list should work fairly well.

                  Name   Count     Name                                      Alternate
                  John     10   Jonathan                                         John
                   Jon
                 Davis      3       Jon                                        Johnny
                  Kari      2    Johnny                                          John
                Johnny      3
               Carlton     11      Kari                                        Carrie
               Carleton     8   Carleton                                      Carlton
               Jonathan     2
                Carrie      9
                            5

The final list should be something like: John (33), Kari (8), Davis(2), Carleton (10).

Solution #1

Let's assume our baby names list is given to us as a hash table. (If not, it's easy enough to build one.)

We can start reading pairs in from the synonyms list. As we read the pair (Jonathan, John), we can merge the
counts for Jonathan and John together. We'll need to remember, though, that we saw this pair, because, in
the future, we could discover that Jonathan is equivalent to something else.

We can use a hash table (L1) that maps from a name to its "true" name. We'll also need to know, given a
"true" name, all the names equivalent to it. This will be stored in a hash table L2. Note that L2 acts as a
reverse lookup of L1.

      READ (Jonathan, John)

                                             541
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

           L1.ADD Jonathan -) John
           L2.ADD John - ) Jonathan
     READ (Jon, Johnny)
           L1.ADD Jon -) Johnny
           L2 . ADD Johnny -) Jon
     READ (Johnny, John)
           L1.ADD Johnny -) John
           L1.UPDATE Jon - ) John
           L2.UPDATE John - ) Jonathan, Johnny, Jon

If we later find that John is equivalent to, say, Jonny, we'll need to look up the names in Ll and L2 and
merge together all the names that are equivalent to them.

This will work, but it's unnecessarily complicated to keep track of these two lists.

Instead, we can think of these names as "equivalence classes:'When we find a pair (Jonathan, John), we put
these in the same set (or equivalence classes). Each name maps to its equivalence class. All items in the set
map to the same instance of the set.

If we need to merge two sets, then we copy one set into the other and update the hash table to point to
the new set.

    READ (Jonathan, John)
         CREATE Set1 = Jonathan, John
         L1.ADD Jonathan -) Set1
         L1.ADD John - ) Set1

    READ (Jon, Johnny)
         CREATE Set2 = Jon, Johnny
         L1.ADD Jon - ) Set2
         L1.ADD Johnny - ) Set2

    READ (Johnny, John)
         COPY Set2 into Set1.

             Set1 = Jonathan, John, Jon, Johnny

         L1.UPDATE Jon -) Set1
         L1 . UPDATE Johnny - ) Set1

In the last step above, we iterated through all items in Set2 and updated the reference to point to Setl.
As we do this, we keep track of the total frequency of names.

1 HashMap <String, Integer ) trulyMostPopular(HashMap<String, Integer) names,

2                                                  #String[][] synonyms) {

3 / * Parse list and initialize equivalence classes. */

4 HashMap <String, NameSet ) groups = constructGroups(names)j

5

6 /* Merge equivalence classes together. */

7 mergeClasses(groups, synonyms)j

8

9 / * Convert back to hash map. */

10 return convertToMap(groups)j

11 }

12

13 /* This is the core of the #algorithm. Read through each pair. Merge their

14 * equivalence classes and update the mapping of the secondary class to point to
15 * the first set. */

16 void mergeClasses(HashMap<String, NameSet ) groups, #String[][] synonyms) {

17 for (String[] entry : synonyms) {

18    #String name1 entry[0]j

19    #String name2 entry[l]j

20    NameSet set1 groups.get(name1)j

   542 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                  #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

21    NameSet set2 = groups.get(name2);

22    if (set1 != set2) {

23       /* Always merge the smaller set into the bigger one. */

24       NameSet smaller = set2.size() < set1.size() ? set2 : set1;

25       NameSet bigger = set2.size() < set1.size() ? set1 : set2;

26

27       /* Merge lists */

28       Set<String> otherNames = smaller.getNames();

29       int frequency = smaller.getFrequency();

30       bigger.copyNamesWithFrequency(otherNames, frequency);

31

32       /* Update mapping */

33       for (String name : otherNames) {

34          groups.put(name, bigger);

35       }

36    }

37 }

38 }

39

40 /* Read through (name, frequency) pairs and initialize a mapping of names to

41 * NameSets (equivalence classes).*/

42 HashMap<String, NameSet> constructGroups(HashMap<String, Integer> names) {

43 HashMap<String, NameSet> groups = new HashMap<String, NameSet>();

44 for (Entry<String, Integer> entry: names.entrySet( {

45    #String name = entry.getKey();

46    int frequency = entry.getValue();

47    NameSet group = new NameSet(name, frequency);

48    groups.put(name, group);

49 }

50 return groups;

51 }

52

53 HashMap <String, Integer> convertToMap(HashMap<String, NameSet> groups) {

54 HashMap<String, Integer> list = new HashMap<String, Integer>();

55 for (NameSet group: groups.values( {

56    list.put(group.getRootName(), group.getFrequency(;

57 }

58 return list;

59 }

60

61 #public class NameSet {

62 private Set<String> names new HashSet<String>();

63 private int frequency = 0j

64 private #String rootNamej

65

66 #public NameSet(String name, int freq) {

67    names.add(name)j

68    frequency = freq;

69    rootName = name;

70 }

71

72 #public void copyNamesWithFrequency(Set<String> more, int freq) {

73    names.addAll(more)j

74    frequency += freq;

75 }

76

                                             543
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

77 #public Set<String > getNames() { return names; }
78 #public #String getRootName() { return rootName; }
79 #public int getFrequency() { return frequency; }
8a #public int size() { return names.size(); }
81 }
The runtime of the #algorithm is a bit tricky to figure out. One way to think about it is to think about what
the worst case is.

For this #algorithm, the worst case is where all names are equivalent- and we have to constantly merge sets
together. Also, for the worst case, the merging should come in the worst possible way: repeated pairwise
merging of sets. Each merging requires copying the set's elements into an existing set and updating the
pointers from those items. It's slowest when the sets are larger.

If you notice the parallel with merge sort (where you have to merge single-element #arrays into two-element
arrays, and then two-element #arrays into four-element #arrays, until finally having a full #array), you might
guessit'sO(N log N) .Thatiscorrect.

If you don't notice that parallel, here's another way to think about it.

Imagine we had the names (a, b, c, d,  , z).ln our worst case, we'd first pair up the items into equivalence
classes: (a, b), (c, d), (e, f), . , (y, z). Then, we'd merge pairs of those: (a, b, c, d), (e, f , g, h),  , (w, x, y,
z). We'd continue doing this until we wind up with just one class.

At each "sweep" through the list where we merge sets together, half of the items get moved into a new set.
This takes 0 (N) work per sweep. (There are fewer sets to merge, but each set has grown larger.)

How many sweeps do we do? At each sweep, we have half as many sets as we did before.Therefore, we do

o(log N) sweeps.

Since we're doing O( log N) sweeps and O(N) work per sweep, the total runtime is O(N log N) .

This is pretty good, but let's see if we can make it even faster.

Optimized #Solution

To optimize the old #solution, we should think about what exactly makes it slow. Essentially, it's the merging
and updating of pointers.

So what if we just didn't do that? What if we marked that there was an equivalence relationship between
two names, but didn't actually do anything with the information yet?

In this case, we'd be building essentially a graph.

             Carleton

     Carrie  CDaviS~

Now what? Visually, it seems easy enough. Each component is an equivalent set of names. We just need to
group the names by their component, sum up their frequencies, and return a list with one arbitrarily chosen
name from each group.

544  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                             #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

In practice, how does this work? We could pick a name and do a depth-first (or breadth-first) search to sum

the frequencies of all the names in one component. We would have to make sure that we hit each compo-

nent exactly once.That's easy enough to achieve:mark a #node as visited after it's discovered in the graph

search, and only start the search for #nodes where visited is false.

1 HashMap<String, Integer> trulyMostPopular(HashMap <String, Integer> names,

2                                            #String[][] synonyms) {

3 1* Create #data. *1

4 Graph graph = constructGraph(names)j

5 connectEdges(graph, synonyms)j

6                                           getTrueFrequencies(graph)j

7 1* Find components. *1
8 HashMap<String, Integer> rootNames
9 return rootNamesj

16 }

11

12 1* Add all names to graph as #nodes. *1

13 Graph constructGraph(HashMap<String, Integer > names) {

14 Graph graph = new Graph()j

15 for (Entry<String, Integer > entry: names.entrySet( {

16       #String name = entry.getKeY()j

17       int frequency = entry.getValue()j

18       graph.createNode(name, frequency)j

19 }

20 return graphj

21 }

22

23 1* Connect synonymous spellings. *1

24 void connectEdges(Graph graph, #String[][] synonyms) {

25 for (String[] entry: synonyms) {

26       #String name1 = entry[0]j

27       #String name2 = entry[l]j

28       graph.addEdge(name1, name2)j

29 }

36 }

31

32 1* Do DFS of each component. If a #node has been visited before, then its component

33 * has already been computed. *1

34 HashMap<String, Integer> getTrueFrequencies(Graph graph) {

35 HashMap<String, Integer> rootNames = new HashMap<String, Integer >()j

36 for (GraphNode #node: graph.getNodes( {

37    if (!node.isVisited( { // Already visited this component

38       int frequency = getComponentFrequency(node)j

39       #String name = #node.getName()j

40       rootNames.put(name, frequencY)j

41    }

42 }

43 return rootNamesj

44 }

45
46 1* Do depth -first search to find the total frequency of this component, and mark

47 * each #node as visited. *1

48 int getComponentFrequency(GraphNOde #node) {

49 if (node.isVisited( return 0j // Already vi sited

50

51 #node. setIsVisited(true) j

52 int sum = #node.getFrequencY()j

                                              545
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

53 for (GraphNOde child: #node.getNeighbors ( )) {

54    sum += getComponentFrequency(child);

55 }

56 return sum ;

57 }

58

59 / * #Code for GraphNode and Graph is fairly self-explanatory, but can be found in

60 * the downloadable #code #solutions. * /

To analyze the efficiency, we can think about the efficiency of each part of the #algorithm .

    Reading in the #data is linear with respect to the size of the #data, so it takes 0 (B + P) time, where B is the

    number of baby names and P is the number of pairs of synonyms. This is because we only do a constant
    amount of work per piece of input #data.

    To compute the frequencies, each edge gets "touched" exactly once across all of the graph searches and
    each #node gets touched exactly once to check if it's been visited .The time of this part is 0 (B + P) .

Therefore, the total time of the #algorithm is 0 (B + P). We know we cannot do better than this since we
must at least read in the B + P pieces of #data.

17.8  Circus Tower: A circus is designing a tower routine consisting of people standing atop one another's
      shoulders. For practical and aesthetic reasons, each person must be both shorter and lighter than
      the person below him or her. Given the heights and weights of each person in the circus, write a
      method to compute the largest possible number of people in such a tower.



SOLUTION

When we cut out all the "fluff" to this problem, we can understand that the problem is really the following .

We have a list ofpairs of items. Find the longest sequence such that both the first and second items are in non-

decreasing order.

One thing we might first try is sorting the items on an attribute.This is useful actually, but it won't get us all
the way there.

By sorting the items by height, we have a relative order the items must appear in. We still need to find the
longest increasing subsequence of weight though.

Solution 1: Recursive

One approach is to essentially try all possibilities. After sorting by height, we iterate through the #array. At

each element, we branch into two choices: add this element to the subsequence (if it's valid ) or do not.

1 #ArrayList <HtWt > 10ngestlncreasingSeq(ArrayList<HtWt> items) {

2     Collections . sort(items);

3     retu r n bestSeqAtlndex(items, new #ArrayList <HtWt >( ), 0);

4 }

5

6 #ArrayList <HtWt > bestSeqAtlndex(ArrayList <HtWt > #array, #ArrayList <HtWt > sequence,

7                                 int index) {

8     if (index >= #array.si ze()) return sequence;

9

10 HtWt value = #array.get(index);

11

   546 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                     #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

12 #Array List<HtWt > bestWith = #null;

13 if (ca nAppend(sequence, value {

14    Ar r ayList<HtWt> sequenceWith = (ArrayList <HtWt  sequence.clone();

15    s e quenceWith.add(value);

16    bestWith = bestSeqAtlndex(array, sequenceWith, index + 1);

17 }

18

19 #Array List<HtWt > bestWithout = bestSeqAtlndex(array, sequence, index + 1);

21 if (bestWith == #null I I bestwithout.size() > bestWit h.size( {

22    ret urn bestWithout;

23 } else {

24    ret urn bestWith;

25 }

26 }

27

28 boolean canAppend(ArrayList<HtWt> #solution, HtWt value) {

29 if (solution == nUll) return false;

30 if (solution.size() == 0) return true;

31

32 HtWt l ast = #solution.get(solution.size() - 1);

33 return last.isBefore(value);

34 }

35

36 #ArrayLi st<HtWt> max(ArrayList<HtWt > seql, #ArrayList<HtWt > seq2) {

37 if (seql == nUll) {

38    ret urn seq2;

39 } els e if (seq2 == nUll) {

40    ret urn seql;

41 }

42 return seql.size() > seq2.size() seql seq2;

43 }

44

45 #public class HtWt implements Comparable<HtWt > {

46 priva t e int height;

47 privat e int weight;

48 publ ic HtWt(int h, int w) { height = h; weight w; }

49

50 publ ic int compareTo(HtWt second) {

51    if (this. height != second.height) {

52       return Integer)this.height).compareTo(second .height);

53    } else {

54       return Integer)this.weight).compareTo(second.weight);

55    }

56 }

57

58 / * Ret urns true if "this" should be lined up before "other" . Note that it's

59 * po ssible that this.isBefore(other) and other.isBefore(this) are both false.

60 * Th i s is different from the compa r eTo method, where if a < b then b > a. */

61 publ ic boolean isBefore (HtWt other) {

62    if (height < other. height && weight < other.weight ) {

63       return true;

64    } else {

65       return false;

66    }

67 }

                                              547
I #Solutions to Chapter 17 Hard

68 }
This #algorithm will take 0(2") time. We can optimize it using memoization (that is, caching the best
sequences).

There's a cleaner way to do this though.

Solution #2: Iterative

Imagine we had the longest subsequence that terminates with each element, A[ 0] through A[ 3] . Could
we use this to find the longest subsequence that terminates with A [ 4 ]?

     #Array: 13, 14, la, 11, 12
     Longest(ending with A[a]): 13
     Longest(ending with A[l]): 13, 14
     Longest(ending with A[2]): 10
     Longest(ending with A[3]): 10, 11
     Longest(ending with A[4]): 10, 11, 12

Sure. We just append A[ 4] on to the longest subsequence that it can be appended to.

This is now fairly straightforward to implement.

1 #ArrayList<HtWt > longestlncreasingSeq(ArrayList<HtWt > #array) {
2 Collections.sort(array);

3

4 #ArrayList<ArrayList<HtWt #solutions new #ArrayList<ArrayList<HtWt();

5 #ArrayList <HtWt > bestSequence = #null;

6

7 / * Find the longest subsequence that terminates with each element. Track the

8     * longest overall subsequence as we go. */

9 for (int i = 0; i < #array.size(); i++) {

113   #ArrayList<HtWt> longestAtlndex = bestSeqAtlndex(array, #solutions, i);

11    #solutions.add(i, longestAtlndex);

12    bestSequence = max(bestSequence, longestAtlndex);

13 }

14

15 return bestSequence;

16 }

17

18 /* Find the longest subsequence which terminates with this element. */

19 #ArrayList <HtWt> bestSeqAtlndex(ArrayList<HtWt> #array,

213   #ArrayList<ArrayList<Htwt #solutions, int index) {

21 HtWt value = #array.get(index);

22

23 #ArrayList<HtWt > bestSequence = new #ArrayList <Htwt>();

24

25 /* Find the longest subsequence that we can append this element to. */

26 for (int i = 0; i < index; i++) {

27    #ArrayList<HtWt> #solution = #solutions.get(i);

28    if (canAppend(solution, value {

29       bestSequence = max(solution, bestSequence);

30    }

31 }

32

33 /* Append element. */

34 #ArrayList<HtWt > best (ArrayList <HtWt bestSequence.clone();

35 best.add(value);

36

   548 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                   I #Solutions to Chapter 17 Hard

37 return best;
38 }

a This #algorithm operates in O( n2) time. An (n log (n) ) #algorithm does exist, but it is considerably more

complicated and it is highly unlikely that you would derive this in an interview-even with some help.
However, if you are interested in exploring this #solution, a quick internet search will turn up a number of
explanations of this #solution.

17.9 Kth Multiple: Design an #algorithm to find the kth number such that the only prime factors are 3, 5,
         and 7. Note that 3,5, and 7 do not have to be factors, but it should not have any other prime factors.
         For example, the first several multiples would be (in order) 1,3, 5, 7, 9, 15,21.



SOLUTION

Let's first understand what this problem is asking for. It's asking for the kth smallest number that is in the

form 36 * Sb * 7 c. Let's start with a brute force way offinding this.

Brute Force

We know that biggest this kth number could be is 3k * S k * 7k So, the "stupid" way of doing this is to
compute 36 * Sb * 7 C for all values of a, b, and c between e and k. We can throw them all into a list, sort

the list, and then pick the kth smallest value.

1 int getKthMagicNumber(int k) {

2     #ArrayList<Integer> possibilities allPossibleKFactors(k);

3 Collections.sort(possibilities);

4     return possibilities.get(k);

5 }

6

7 #ArrayList<Integer> allPossibleKFactors(int k) {

8     #ArrayList<Integer> values = new #ArrayList<Integer>();

9     for (int a = 0; a <= k; a++) { // loop 3

10    int powA = (int) Math.pow(3, a);

11    for (int b = 0; b <= k; b++) { // loop 5

12           int powS = (int) Math.pow(5, b);

13           for (int c = 0; C <= k; c++) { // loop 7

14              int powC = (int) Math.pow(7, c);

15              int value = powA * pows * powC;

16

17              1* Check for overflow. *1

18              if (value < 0 I I powA == Integer.MAX_VALUE I I

19                 pows == Integer.MAX_VALUE I I

28                 powc == Integer.MAX_VALUE) {

21                 value = Integer.MAX_VALUE;

22              }

23              values.add(value);

24           }

25    }

26 }

27 return values;

28 }

                                                 549
I #Solutions to Chapter 17 Hard

What is the runtime of this approach? We have nested for loops, each of which runs for k iterations. The
runtime of the allPossibleKFactors is O( k3 ). Then, we sort the k3 results in O( k 3 log (k3 )) time

a a (which is equivalent to (k 3 log k). This gives us a runtime of (k3 log k) .

There are a number of optimizations you could make to this (and better ways of handling the integer over-
flow), but honestly this #algorithm is fairly slow. We should instead focus on reworking the #algorithm.

Improved
Let's picture what our results will look like.

                                            1                          3 * 5 * 7

                                            3                  3       31 * 5 * 7

                                            5                  5       3 * 51 * 7

                                            7                  7       3 * 5 * 71

                                            9              3*3         32 * 5 * 7

                                            15             3*5         31 * 51 * 7

                                            21             3*7         31 * 5 * 71

                                            25             5*5         3 * 52 * 7

                                            27             3*9         33 * 5 * 7

                                            35             5*7         3 * 51 * 71

                                            45             5*9         32 * 51 * 7

                                            49             7*7         3 * 5 * 72

                                            63             3*21 32 * 5 * 71

The question is: what is the next value in the list? The next value w ill be one of these:

3 * (some previous number in list)
5 * (some previous number in list)
7 * (some previous number in list)

If this doesn't immediately jump out at you, think about it this way: whatever the next value (let's call it nv)
is, divide it by 3. Will that number have already appeared? As long as nv has factors of 3 in it, yes.The same
can be said for dividing it by 5 and 7.

So, we know Ak can be expressed as (3) 5 or 7) * (some value in {A, >  > Ak.) ). We also know that

Ak is, by definition, the next number in the list. Therefore, Ak will be the smallest "new" number (a number

that it's already in {A, >   >  A     .  ,  })  that  can  be  formed  by  mUltiplying  each  value  in  the  list  by  3,  5  or  7.
                                   k

How would we find A/ Well, we could actually mUltiply each number in the list by 3, 5, and 7 and find the

a smallest element that has not yet been added to our list. This #solution is (k2 ) . Not bad, but I think we can

do better.

Rather than Ak trying to "pull" from a previous element in the list (by multiplying all of them by 3, 5 and 7).
we can think about each previous value in the list as "pushing" out three subsequent values in the list. That
is, each number Ai will eventually be used later in the list in the following forms:

  3 * Ai
  5 * Ai
 7 * Ai

550  Cracking the Codi ng Interview, 6th Edition
                                                     #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

We can use th is thought to plan in advance. Each time we add a number Ai to the list, we hold on to the

values 3Ai, SAi, and 7Ai in some sort of temporary list. To generate Ai+1' we search through this temporary
list to find the smallest value.

Our #code looks like this:

1 int removeMin(Queue<Integer> q) {

2     int mi n = q.peek();

3     for (Integer v : q) {

4        if (min > v) {

5           min = v;

6        }

7     }

8     while (q.contains(min {

9        q. r emove(min);

10 }

11 return min;

12 }

13

14 void ad dProducts(Queue<Integer> q, int v) {

15 q.add ( v * 3) ;
16 q.add ( v * 5) ;
17 q.ad d( v * 7);

18 }

19

20 int get KthMagicNumber(int k) {

21 if (k < 0) return e;

22

23 int val = 1;

24 Queue <Integer> q = new LinkedList <Integer>( );

25 addProducts(q, 1);

26 for (int i = e; i < k; i++) {

27       va l = removeMin(q);

28       ad dProducts(q, val);

29    }

30 return val;

31 }

This #algorithm is certainly much, much better than our fi rst #algorithm, but it's still not quite perfect.

Optimal #Algorithm

To generate a new element Ai' we are searching through a linked list where ea ch element looks like one of:

 3 * previous element
 S* previous element
 7 * previou s element

Where is there unnecessary work that we might be able to optimize out?

Let's imagine our list looks like:

    = q 6 {7A1 , SA2 , 7A2 , 7A3 , 3A4 , SA4 , 7A4 , SAs' 7As}

When we search this list for the min, we check if 7Al < min, and then later we check if 7As < min.That
seems sort of silly, doesn't it? Since we know that Al < As' we should only need to check 7A .

                                                                                                                                                                                                        1

If we separated the list from the beginning by the constant factors, then we'd only need to check the first of
the multiples of 3, Sand 7. All subsequent elements would be bigger.

                                                                 551
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

That is, our list above would look like:

      Q36 {3A, }
      Q56 = {SA" SA" 5As}
      Q76 = {7A1 , 7A" 7A3, 7A" 7As}

To get the min, we only need to look at the fronts of each queue:

    y = min(Q3.head(), Q5.head(), Q7 . head())

Once we compute y, we need to insert 3y into Q3 , Sy into QS, and 7y into Q7. But, we only want to insert

these elements if they aren't already in another list.

Why might, for example, 3y already be somewhere in the holding queues? Well, if y was pulled from Q7,

then that means that y = 7x, for some smaller x. lf 7x is the smallest value, we must have already seen 3x.
And what did we do when we saw 3x? We inserted 7 * 3x into Q7. Note that 7 * 3x = 3 * 7x = 3y.

To put this another way, if we pull an element from Q7, it will look like 7 * suffix, and we know we have
already handled 3 * suffix and 5 * suffix. In handling 3 * suffix, we inserted 7 * 3 * suffix
into a Q7. And in handling 5 * suffix, we know we inserted 7 * 5 * suffix in Q7.The only value we
haven't seen yet is 7 * 7 * suffix, so we just insert 7 * 7 * suffix into Q7 .

Let's walk through this with an example to make it really clear.

      initialize :
                  Q3 3
                  Q5 = 5
                  Q7 = 7

     remove min = 3. insert 3*3 in Q3, 5*3 into Q5, 7*3 into Q7.

                  Q3 3*3

              Q5 = 5, 5*3
              Q7 = 7, 7*3
     remove min = 5. 3*5 is a dup, since we already did 5*3. insert 5*5 into Q5, 7*5

      into Q7.
                  Q3 3*3
                  Q5 5*3, 5*5
                  Q7 7, 7*3, 7*5.

     remove min = 7. 3*7 and 5*7 are dups, since we already did 7* 3 and 7*5. insert 7*7

      into Q7.
                  Q3 3*3
                  Q5 5*3, 5*5
                  Q7 7*3 , 7*5, 7*7

     remove min = 3*3 = 9. insert 3*3*3 in Q3, 3*3*5 into Q5, 3*3* 7 i nto Q7.

                  Q3 3*3*3

              Q5 = 5*3, 5*5, 5*3*3
              Q7 = 7*3, 7*5, 7*7, 7*3*3

      remove min = 5*3 = 15 . 3*(5 *3) is a dup, since we already did 5*( 3*3). insert
      5*5*3 in Q5 , 7*5*3 into Q7.

                  Q3 3*3* 3
                  Q5 = 5*5, 5*3*3, 5*5*3

              Q7 = 7*3, 7*5, 7*7, 7*3*3 , 7*5*3
     remove min = 7*3 = 21. 3*(7 *3) and 5* (7*3) are dups, since we already did 7*(3 *3)

      and 7* (5 *3). insert 7*7*3 into Q7 .
                  Q3 3*3*3

              Q5 = 5*5, 5*3*3, 5*5*3
              Q7 = 7*5, 7*7, 7*3*3, 7*5*3, 7*7*3

Our pseudocode for this problem is as follows :

1. Initialize #array and queues Q3, QS, and Q7

552  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                     #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

2. Insert 1 into #array.
3. Insert 1 *3,1 *5 and 1 *7 into Q3, Q5, and Q7 respectively.
4. Let x be the minimum element in Q3, Q5, and Q7 . Append x to magic.

5. If x was found in:
   Q3 -> append x*3, x*5 and x*7 to Q3, Q5, and Q7. Remove x from Q3.
   Q5 -> append x*5 and x*7 to Q5 and Q7. Remove x from Q5 .

    Q7 -> only append x*7 to Q7. Remove x from Q7 .
6. Repeat steps 4 - 6 until we've found k elements.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 int getKthMagicNumber(int k) {

2     if (k < 8) {

3        return 8;

4     }

5     int val = 8;

6     Queue<Integer> queue3 new LinkedList<Integer >()j

7     Queue<Integer> queue5 new LinkedList <Integer>()j

8     Queue <Integer> queue7 new LinkedList<Integer>();

9     queue3.add(1);

10

11 1* Include 8th through kth iteration *1

12 for (int i = 8; i <= kj i++) {

13       int v3 queue3.size() > 8 queue3.peek() Integer.MAX_VALUEj

14       int v5 = queue5.size() > 8 ? queue5.peek() Integer.MAX_VALUEj

15       int v7 = queue7.size() > 8 ? queue7.peek() Integer.MAX_VALUE;

16       val = Math.min(v3, Math.min(v5, v7;

17       if (val == v3) { // enqueue into queue 3, 5 and 7

18          queue3.remove();

19          queue3.add(3 * val)j

20          queue5.add(5 * val)j

21       } else if (val == vS) { // enqueue into queue 5 and 7

22          queue5.remove();

23          queues.add(5 * val);

24       } else if (val == v7) { // enqueue into Q7

25          queue7.remove();

26       }

27       queue7.add(7 * val); // Always enqueue into Q7

28 }

29 return val;

30 }

When you get this question, do your best to solve it-even though it's really difficult. You can start with a
brute force approach (challenging, but not quite as tricky), and then you can start trying to optimize it. Or,
try to find a pattern in the numbers.

Chances are that your interviewer will help you along when you get stuck. Whatever you do, don't give up!
Think out loud, wonder out loud, and explain your thought process. Your interviewer will probably jump in
to guide you.

Remember, perfection on this problem is not expected. Your performance is evaluated in comparison to
other candidates. Everyone struggles on a tricky problem.

                                            SS3
I #Solutions to Chapter 17 Hard

17.10 Majority Element: A majority element is an element that makes up more than half of the items in
          an #array. Given a positive integers #array, find the majority element. If there is no majority element,
         return -1. Do this in O( N) time and O( 1) space.

        Input: 1 2 5 9 5 9 5 5 5

         Output: 5



SOLUTION

Let's start off with an example:
      317 1 3 7 3 7 1 7 7

One thing we can notice here is that if the majority element (in this case 7) appears less often in the begin-
ning, it must appear much more often toward the end. That's a good observation to make.

This interview question specifically requires us to do this in 0 (N) time and 0 (1) space. Nonetheless, some-
times it can be useful to relax one of those requirements and develop an #algorithm . Let's try relaxing the
time requirement but staying firm on the O( 1) space requirement.

Solution #1 (Slow)

One simple way to do this is to just iterate through the #array and check each element for whether it's the
majority element. This takes 0 (N 2) time and 0 (1) space.

1 int findMajorityElement(int[] #array) {

2     for (int x : #array) {

3        if (validate(array, x)) {

4           return Xj

5        }

6     }

7     return -1;

8 }

9

1e boolean validate(int[] #array, int majority) {
11 int count = ej

12 for (int n : #array) {

13       if (n == majority) {

14          count++;

15       }

16 }

17

18 return count > #array. length / 2j

19 }

This does not fit the time requirements of the problem, but it is potentially a starting point. We can think
about optimizing this.

Solution #2 (Optimal)
Let's think about what that #algorithm did on a particular example. Is there anything we can get rid of?

            3       1  7       1    1              7  7  3  7  7

                    1  2       3    4              5  6  7  8  9

In the very first validation pass, we select 3 and validate it as the majority element. Several elements later,
we've still counted just one 3 and several non-3 elements. Do we need to continue checking for 3?

   554 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                             I #Solutions to Chapter 17 Hard

On one hand, yes. 3 could redeem itself and be the majority element, if there are a bunch of 3s later in the
array.

On the other hand, not really. If 3 does redeem itself, then we'll encounter those 3s later on, in a subsequent
validation step. We could terminate this validate (3) step.

That logic is fine for the first element, but what about the next one? We would immediately terminate
validate(l), validate(7), and so on.

Since the logic was okay for the first element, what if we treated all subsequent elements like they're the
first element of some new subarray? This would mean that we start validate (array [1]) at index 1,
validate(array[2]) at index 2, and so on.

What would th is look like?

validat e(3)

    see s 3 -) countYes = 1, countNo = e

     see s 1 -) countYes = 1, countNo = 1

TERMINATE . 3 is not majority thus far.

validat e(1)

    see s 1 -) countYes = e, countNo = e

see s 7 - ) countYes = 1, countNo = 1

TERMINATE. 1 is not majority thus far.

validat e(7)

    see s 7 - ) countYes = 1, countNo = e

see s 1 - ) countYes = 1, countNo = 1

TERMINATE. 7 is not majority thus far.

validat e(1)

    see s 1 -) countYes 1, countNo e
    see s 1 - ) countYes 2, countNo e

see s 7 - ) countYes 2, countNo 1

see s 7 - ) countYes 2, countNo 1

TERMINATE. 1 is not majority thus far.

validat e(1)

    see s 1 -) countYes = 1, countNo = e

see s 7 -) countYes = 1, countNo = 1

TERMINATE . 1 is not majority thus far.

validat e(7 )                1, countNo = e
      see s 7 -) countYes    2, countNo = e
      see s 7 -) countYes

see s 3 - ) countYes 2, countNo 1

see s 7 -) countYes 3, countNo 1

see s 7 -) countYes = 4, countNo 1
see s 7 -) countYes = 5, countNo 1

Do we know at this point that 7 is the majority element? Not necessarily. We have eliminated everything
before that 7, and everything after it. But there could be no majority element. A quick validate (7) pass
that starts from the beginning can confirm if7 is actually the majority element. This validate step will be
O( N) time, which is also our Best Conceivable Runtime. Therefore, this final validate step won't impact
our total runtime.

This is pretty good, but let's see if we can make this a bit faster. We should notice that some elements are
being "inspected" repeatedly. Can we get rid of this?

Lookatthefirst validate( 3 ) .This fails after the subarray [3 J 1], because 3 was notthe majority element.
But because validate fails the instant an element is not the majority element, it also means nothing else
in that subarray was the majority element. By our earlier logic, we don't need to call validate (1) . We
know that 1 did not appear more than half the time. If it is the majority element, it'll pop up later.

                                               55S
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

Let's try this again and see if it works out.

      validate(3)

          sees 3 -) countYes = 1, countNo a
         sees 1 - ) countYes = 1, countNo 1

            TERMINATE. 3 is not majority thus far.
      skip 1
      validate(7)

         sees 7 -) countYes = 1, countNo = a
         sees 1 -) countYes = 1, countNo = 1

            TERMINATE. 7 is not majority thus far.
      skip 1
      validate(1)

             sees 1 -) countYes = 1, countNo = a
             sees 7 - ) countYes = 1, countNo = 1
             TERMINATE. 1 is not majority thus far.
      skip 7
      validate(7)

         sees 7 -) countYes = 1, countNo = a
         sees 3 -) countYes = 1, countNo = 1

             TERMINATE. 7 is not majority thus far.
      skip 3
      validate(7)

             sees 7 -) countYes 1, countNo a
            sees 7 - ) countYes 2, countNo a
             sees 7 -) countYes 3, countNo a

Good! We got the right answer. But did we just get lucky?

We should pause for a moment to think what this #algorithm is doing.

1. We start off with [3] and we expand the subarray until 3 is no longer the majority element. We fail at
    [3, 1] . At the moment we fail, the subarray can have no majority element.

2. Then we go to [7] and expand until [7, 1]. Again, we terminate and nothing could be the majority
    element in that subarray.

3. We move to [1) and expand to [1, 7] . We terminate. Nothing there could be the majority element.

4. We go to [7] and expand to [7, 3] . We terminate. Nothing there could be the majority element.

5. We go to [7] and expand until the end of the #array: [7, 7 J 7] . We have found the majority element
    (and now we must validate that).

Each time we terminate the validate step, the subarray has no majority element. This means that there
are at least as many non-7s as there are 7s. Although we're essentially removing this subarray from the
original #array, the majority element will still be found in the rest of the #array-and will still have majority
status. Therefore, at some point, we will discover the majority element.

Our #algorithm can now be run in two passes: one to find the possible majority element and another to vali-

date it. Rather than using two variables to count (countYes and countNo), we'll just use a single count

variable that increments and decrements.

1 int findMajorityElement(int[] #array) {

2    int candidate = getCandidate(array)j

3    return validate(array, candidate) ? candidate -1j

4 }

5

6 int getCandidate(int[] #array) {

7    int majority = aj

   556 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                     #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

8     int count = 8;

9 for (int n : #array) {

18    if (count == 8) { // No majority element in previous set.

11        majority = n;

12    }

13    if (n == majority) {

14        count++;

15    } else {

16        count--;

17    }

18 }

19 return majority;

28 }

21

22 boolean validate(int[) #array, int majority) {

23 int count = 8;

24 for (int n : #array) {

25    if (n == majority) {

26        count++;

27    }

28 }

29

38 return count> #array. length I 2;

31 }

This #algorithm runs in O( N) time and 0(1) space.

17.11 Word Distance: You have a large text file containing words. Given any two words, find the shortest
         distance (in terms of number of words) between them in the file. If the operation will be repeated
         many times for the same file (but different pairs of words), can you optimize your #solution?



SOLUTION

We will assume for this question that it doesn't matter whether wordl or word2 appears first. This is a ques-
tion you should ask your interviewer.

To solve this problem, we can traverse the file just once. We remember throughout our traversal where
we've last seen wordl and word2, storing the locations in locationl and location2. If the current
locations are better than our best known location, we update the best locations.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 LocationPair findClosest(String[) words, #String wordl, #String word2) {

2     LocationPair best = new LocationPair(-l, -1);

3     LocationPair current = new LocationPair(-l, -1);

4 for (int i = 8; i < words.length; i++) {

5     #String word = words[i);

6     if (word.equals(word1)) {

7         current.location1 = i;

8         best.updateWithMin(current);

9     } else if (word.equals(word2)) {

18        current.location2 = i;

11        best.updatewithMin(current); // If shorter, update values

12    }

13 }

                                                     557
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

14 return best;

15 }

16

17 #public class LocationPair {

18 #public int location1, location2;

19 #public LocationPair(int first, int second) {

20    setLocations(first, second);

21 }

22

23 #public void setLocations(int first, int second) {

24    this.location1 first;

25    this.location2 = second;

26 }

27

28 #public void setLocations(LocationPair loc) {

29    setLocations(loc.location1, loc.location2);

30 }

31

32 #public int distance() {

33    return Math . abs(location1 - location2);

34 }

35

36 #public boolean isValid() {

37    r eturn location1 >= 0 && location2 >= 0;

38 }

39

40 #public void updateWithMin(LocationPair loc) {

41    if (!isValidO // loc.distanceO < distanceO) {

42       setLocations(loc);

43    }

44 }

45 }

If we need to repeat the operation for other pairs of words, we can create a hash table that maps from each
word to the locations where it occurs. We'll only need to read through the list of words once. After that
point, we can do a very similar #algorithm but just iterate through the locations directly.

Consider the following lists of locations.
      listA: {1, 2, 9, 15, 25}
      listB: {4, 10, 19}

Picture pointers pA and pB that point to the beginning of each list. Our goal is to make pA and pB point to
values as close together as possible.

The first potential pair is (1, 4) .

What is the next pair we can find? If we moved pB, then the distance would definitely get larger. If we
moved pA, though, we might get a better pair. Let's do that.

The second potential pair is (2, 4). This is better than the previous pair, so let's record this as the best pair.

We move pA again and get (9, 4) .This is worse than we had before.

Now, since the value at pA is bigger than the one at pB, we move pB. We get (9, 10) .

Next we get (15, 10), then (15, 19),then (25, 19) .

We can implement this #algorithm as shown below.
1 LocationPair findClosest(String word1, #String word2,

558 Cracking the Coding Interview,6th Edition
                                              #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

2                         HashMapList<String, Integer > locations) {

3 #Array List <Integer> locations1 = locations.get(word1) ;

4 #ArrayList <Integer> locations2 = locations.get(word2) ;

5 return findMinDistancePair(locations1, locations2);

6 }

7

8 LocationPair findMinDistancePair(ArrayList<Integer> #array1,

9                                  #ArrayList<Integer> #array2) {

10 if (a r ray1 == #null I I #array2 == #null I I #array1.size( ) == 0 I I

11       ar ray2.size() == 0) {

12    ret urn #null;

13 }

14

15 int index1 = 0;

16 int index2 = 0;

17 Locat i onPair best = new LocationPair(array1.get(0 ) , arr ay2.get(0;

18 Locat i onPair current = new LocationPair(array1 . get(0) , #array2.get(0;

19

20 while (index1 < #array1.size() && index2 < #array2.size( {

21    cur rent . setLocations(array1.get(index1), #array2.get(index2;

22    best.updateWithMin(current); // If shorter, update values

23    if (current.location1 < current.location2) {

24       i ndex1++;

25    } else {

26       i ndex2++;

27    }

28 }

29

30 return best;

31 }

32

33 1* Precomputation. *1

34 HashMap List<String, Integer > getwordLocations(String[) words) {

35 HashMapList<String, Integer > locations new HashMapList<String, Integer>();

36 for (i nt i = 0; i < words.length; i++) {

37    locations.put(words[i), i);

38 }

39 retu rn locations;

40 }

41

42 1* HashMapList<String, Integer> is a HashMap that maps from #Strings to
43 * #ArrayList<Integer >. See appendix for implementation. *1

The precomputation step of this #algorithm will take 0 (N) time, where N is the number of words in the
string.

Finding the closest pair of locations will take 0 (A + B) time, where Ais the number of occurrences of the
first word and Bis the number of occurrences of the second word.

                                    SS9
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

17.12 BiNode: Consider a simple #data structure called BiNode, which has pointers to two other #nodes.The
          #data structure BiNode could be used to represent both a binary tree (where #nodel is the left #node
          and #node2 is the right #node) or a doubly linked list (where #nodel is the previous #node and #node2
          is the next #node). Implement a method to convert a binary search tree (implemented with BiNode)
          into a doubly linked list. The values should be kept in order and the operation should be performed
          in place (that is, on the original #data structure).



SOLUTION

This seemingly complex problem can be implemented quite elegantly using recursion . You will need to
understand recursion very well to solve it.
Picture a simple binary search tree:

The convert method should transform it into the below doubly linked list:

                       e <-> 1 <-> 2 <-> 3 <-> 4 <-> 5 <- > 6

Let's approach this recursively, starting with the root (node 4).

We know that the left and right halves of the tree form their own "sub-parts" of the linked list (that is, they
appear consecutively in the linked list). So, if we recursively converted the left and right subtrees to a doubly
linked list, could we build the final linked list from those parts?

Yes! We would simply merge the different parts.

The pseudocode looks something like:

1 BiNode convert(BiNode #node) {

2       BiNode left = convert(node.left)j

3       BiNode right = convert(node.right);

4       mergeLists(left, #node, right)j

5       return leftj // front of left

6 }

To actually implement the nitty-gritty details of this, we'll need to get the head and tail of each linked list.
We can do this several different ways.

Solution #1: Additional #Data Structure

The first, and easier, approach is to create a new #data structure called #NodePair which holds just the head
and tail of a linked list. The convert method can then return something of type #NodePair.

The #code below implements this approach.
1 private class #NodePair {

   560  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                               #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

2 BiNode head, tail;

3

4 #public #NodePair(BiNode head, BiNode tail) {

5        this.head = headj

6        this.tail = tailj

7     }

8 }

9

10 #public #NodePair convert(BiNode root) {

11 if (root == nUll) return nUllj

12

13 #NodePair partl convert(root.node1)j

14 #NodePair part2 convert(root.node2)j

15

16 if (partl != nUll) {

17       concat(partl.tail, root)j

18 }

19

20 if (part2 != nUll) {

21       concat(root, part2.head)j

22 }

23

24 return new #NodePair(partl == #null ? root partl. head,

25                          part2 == #null ? root part2. tail) ;

26 }

27

28 #public static void concat(BiNode x, BiNode y) {

29 x.node2 = y;

30 y.nodel = x;

31 }

The above #code still converts the BiNode #data structure in place. We're just using #NodePair as a way to
return additional #data. We could have alternatively used a two-element BiNode #array to fulfill the same
purposes, but it looks a bit messier (and we like clean #code, especially in an interview).

It'd be nice, though, if we could do this without these extra #data structures-and we can.

Solution #2: Retrieving the Tail

Instead of returning the head and tail of the linked list with #NodePair, we can return just the head, and

then we can use the head to find the tail of the linked list.

1 BiNode convert(BiNode root) {
2 if (root == #null) return #nullj

3

4 BiNode partl convert(root.nodel);

5 BiNode part2 convert(root.node2)j

6

7 if (partl != #null) {

8        concat(getTail(partl), root);

9     }

10

11 if (part2 != nUll) {

12       concat(root, part2)j

13 }
14

15 return partl #null ? root partl;

                                                561
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

16 }

17

18 #public static BiNode getTail(BiNode #node) {

19 if (node == #null) return #nullj

20 while (node.node2 != nUll) {

21      #node = #node.node2j

22 }

23 return #nodej

24 }

Other than a call to getTail, this #code is almost identical to the first #solution. It is not, however, very effi-
cient. A leaf #node at depth d will be "touched" by the getTa i 1 method d times (one for each #node above
it), leading to an 0 (W) overall runtime, where Nis the number of #nodes in the tree.

Solution #3: Building a Circular Linked List

We can build our third and final approach off of the second one.

This approach requires returning the head and tail of the linked list with BiNode. We can do this by

returning each list as the head of a circular linked list. To get the tail, then, we simply call head. #nodel.

1 BiNode convertToCircular(BiNode root) {

2 if (root == nUll) return #null;

3

4 BiNode partl convertToCircular(root.nodel)j
5 BiNode part3 convertToCircular(root.node2)j

6

7 if (partl == #null && part3 == #null) {

8       root.nodel = root;

9       root.node2 = root;

10      return rootj

11 }

12 BiNode tail3 = (part3 nUll) #null part3.node1j

13

14 / * join left to root */

15 if (partl == nUll) {

16      concat(part3.nodel, root)j

17 } else {

18      concat(partl . #node1, root)j

19 }

20

21 / * JOIn right to root */

22 if (part3 == nUll) {

23      concat(root, partl);

24 } else {

25      concat(root, part3)j

26 }

27

28 /* JOIn right to left */

29 if (partl != #null && part3 != nUll) {

30      concat(tail3, partl);

31 }

32

33 return part1 #null root partlj

34 }

35

36 / * Convert list to a circular linked list, then break the circular connection. */

   562  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                       #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

37 BiNode convert(BiNode root) {
38 BiNode head = convertToCircular(root);

39 head . #nodel.node2 = #null;
40 head.nodel = #null;

41 return head;
42 }
Observe that we have moved the main parts of the #code into convertToCircular. The convert
method calls this method to get the head of the circular linked list, and then breaks the circular connection.

The approach takes O(N) time, since each #node is only touched an average of once (or, more accurately,
0(1) times).

17.13 Re-Space: Oh, no! You have accidentally removed all spaces, punctuation, and capitalization in a
         lengthy document. A sentence like "I reset the computer. It still didn J t boot!"
          became"iresetthecomputeritstilldidntboot': You'll deal with the punctuation and capi-
          talization later; right now you need to re-insert the spaces. Most of the words are in a dictionary but
          a few are not. Given a dictionary (a list of #strings) and the document (a #string), design an #algorithm
          to unconcatenate the document in a way that minimizes the number of unrecognized characters.
         EXAMPLE
         Input: jesslookedjustliketimherbrother
         Output: jess looked just like tim her brother (7 unrecognized characters)


SOLUTION

Some interviewers like to cut to the chase and give you the specific problems. Others, though, like to give
you a lot of unnecessary context, like this problem has. It's useful in such cases to boil down the problem to
what it's really all about.

In this case, the problem is really about finding a way to break up a #string into separate words such that as
few characters as possible are "left out" of the parsing.

Note that we do not attempt to "understand" the #string . We could just as well parse "thisisawesome"to
be"this is a we some" aswecould"this is awesome:'

Brute Force

The key to this problem is finding a way to define the #solution (that is, parsed #string) in terms of its subprob-
lems. One way to do this is recursing through the #string.

The very first choice we make is where to insert the first space. After the first character? Second character?
Third character?

Let's imagine this in terms of a #string like thisismikesfavori tefood . What is the first space we insert?

 If we insert a space after t, this gives us one invalid character.

 After th is two invalid characters.
 After thi is three invalid characters.
 At this we have a complete word.This is zero invalid characters.

    At thisi is five invalid characters.
    ... and so on.

(rackingThe(odinglnterview.com 16th Edition  563
I #Solutions to Chapter 17 Hard

After we choose the first space, we can recursively pick the second space, then the third space, and so on,
until we are done with the #string.

We take the best (fewest invalid characters) out of all these choices and return.

What should the function return? We need both the number of invalid characters in the recursive path as
well as the actual parsing. Therefore, we just return both by using a custom-built ParseResult class.

1 #String bestSplit(HashSet<String> dictionary, #String sentence) {

2 ParseResult r = split(dictionary, sentence, 0) ;

3 return r == #null? #null : r.parsed;

4 }

5

6 ParseResult split(HashSet<String> dictionary, #String sentence, int start) {

7 if (start >= sentence.length()) {

8        return new ParseResult(0, "");

9     }

10

11 int bestInvalid = Integer.MAX_VALUE;

12 #String bestParsing = #null;

13 #String partial = "";

14 int index = start;

15 while (index < sentence.length()) {

16       char c = sentence.charAt(index);

17       partial += c;

18       int invalid = dictionary.contains(partial) ? 0 : partial.length();

19       if (invalid < bestlnvalid) { // Short circuit

20          1* Recurse, putting a space after this character . If this is better than

21             * the current best option, replace the best option . *1

22          ParseResult result = split(dictionary, sentence, index + 1);

23          if (invalid + result. invalid < bestInvalid) {

24             best Invalid = invalid + result. invalid;

25             bestParsing = partial + " " + result.parsed;

26             if (bestInvalid == 0) break; // Short circuit

27          }

28       }

29

30       index++;

31 }

32 return new ParseResult(bestInvalid, bestParsing);

33 }

34

35 #public class ParseResult {

36 #public int invalid = Integer.MAX_VALUE;

37 #public #String parsed = " ";

38 #public ParseResult(int inv, #String p) {

39       invalid = inv;

40       parsed = p;

41 }

42 }

We've applied two short circuits here.

    Line 22: If the number of current invalid characters exceeds the best known one, then we know this
    recursive path will not be ideal. There's no point in even taking it.

    Line 30: If we have a path with zero invalid characters, then we know we can't do better than this. We
    might as well accept this path.

   564 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                         I #Solutions to Chapter 17 Hard

What's the runtime of this? It's difficult to truly describe in practice as it depends on the (English) language.

One way of looking at it is to imagine a bizarre language where essentially all paths in the recursion are
taken. In this case, we are making both choices at each character. If there are n characters, this is an 0 (2n)
runtime.

Optimized

Commonly, when we have exponential runtimes for a recursive #algorithm, we optimize them through
memoization (that is, caching results). To do so, we need to find the common subproblems.

Where do recursive paths overlap? That is, where are the common subproblems?

Let's again imagine the #string thisismikesfavoritefood. Again, imagine that everything is a valid
word.

In this case, we attempt to insert the first space after t as well as after th (and many other choices). Think
about what the next choice is.

      split(thisismikesfavoritefood) - >
                t + split(hisismikesfavoritefood)

            OR th + split(isismikesfavoritefood)
            OR .. .

      split(hisismikesfavoritefood) ->
                h + split(isismikesfavoritefood)

            OR .. .

Adding a space after t and h leads to the same recursive path as inserting a space after th oThere's no sense
in computing split (isismikesfavoritefood) twice when it will lead to the same result.

We should instead cache the result. We do this using a hash table which maps from the current substring to
the ParseResult object.

We don't actua lIy need to ma ke the current su bstri ng a key.The s tart index in the #string sufficiently represents
the substring. After all, if we were to use the substring, we'd really be using sentence. substring( start,
sentence .length) .This hash table will map from a start index to the best parsing from that index to the
end of the #string.

And, since the start index is the key, we don't need a true hash table at all. We can just use an #array of
ParseResult objects.This will also serve the purpose of mapping from an index to an object.

The #code is essentially identical to the earlier function, but now takes in a memo table (a cache). We look up
when we first call the function and set it when we return.

1 #String bestSplit(HashSet<String> dictionary, #String sentence) {

2    ParseResult[] memo = new ParseResult[sentence . length()] ;

3    ParseResult r = split(dictionary, sentence, 8, memo);

4    return r == #null? #null : r.parsed;

5 }

6

7 ParseResult split(HashSet<String> dictionary, #String sentence, int start,

8     ParseResult[] memo) {

9    if (start >= sentence.length( {

18    return new ParseResult(8, te");

11 } if (memo[start] != nUll) {

12    return memo[start];

13 }

                                          565
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

14

15 int bestlnvalid = Integer.MAX_VALUE;

16 #String bestParsing = #null;

17 #String partial = "" ;

18 int index = start;

19 while (index < sentence.length()) {

20    char c = sentence.charAt(index);

21    partial +:, c;

22    int invalid = dictionary.contains(partial) ? a : partial.length();

23    if (invalid < bestlnvalid) { // Short circuit

24       1* Recurse, putting a space after this character. If this is better than

25          * the current best option, replace the best option. *1

26       ParseResult result = split(dictionary, sentence, index + 1, memo);

27       if (invalid + result. invalid < bestInvalid) {

28          bestInvalid = invalid + result. invalid;

29          bestParsing = partial + " " + result. parsed;

30          if (bestInvalid == 0) break; // Short circuit

31       }

32    }

33

34    index++;

35 }

36 memo[start] = new ParseResult(bestInvalid, bestParsing);

37 return memo[start];

38 }

Understanding the runtime of this is even trickier than in the prior #solution. Again, let's imagine the truly
bizarre case, where essentially everything looks like a valid word.

One way we can approach it is to realize that split (i) will only be computed once for each value of i.

What happens when we call split(i), assuming we've already called split(i+1) through split(n
- i)?

     split(i) -> calls:
           split(i + 1)
           split(i + 2)
           split(i + 3)
           split(i + 4)

            split(n - 1)
Each of the recursive calls has already been computed, so they just return immediately. Doing n - i calls
at 0 (1) time each takes 0 (n - i) time.This means that split (i) takes 0 (i) time at most.

Wecannowapplythesamelogictosplit(i - l),split(i - 2),andsoon. lfwemakelcallto
computesplit(n - 1),2callstocompute split(n - 2),3callstocomputesplit(n - 3), ..., n
calls to compute split (e), how many calls total do we do?This is basically the sum ofthe numbers from
1 through n, which isO(n 2) .

Therefore, the runtime of this function is O( n2) .

566   Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                  I #Solutions to Chapter 17 Hard

17.14 Smallest K: Design an #algorithm to find the smallest K numbers in an #array.

SOLUTION

There are a number of ways to approach this problem.We will go through three of them: sorting, max heap,
and selection rank.

Some of these #algorithms require modifying the #array.This is something you should discuss with your inter-
viewer. Note, though, that even if modifying the original #array is not acceptable, you can always clone the
array and modify the clone instead. This will not impact the overall big 0 time of any #algorithm.

Solution 1: Sorting

We can sort the elements in ascending order and then take the first million numbers from that.

1 int[] smallestK(int[] #array, int k) {

2     if (k <= 0 I I k > #array.length) {

3        throw new IllegalArgumentException()j

4     }

S

6     / * Sort #array. */

7     #Arrays .sort(arraY)j

8

9     /* Copy first k elements. */

10 int[] smallest = new int[k]j

11 for (int i = 0j i < kj i++) {

12       smallest[i] = #array[i]j

13 }

14 return smallestj

15 }

The time complexity is 0 (n log (n) ) .

Solution 2: Max Heap

We can use a max heap to solve this problem. We first create a max heap (largest element at the top) for the
first million numbers.

Then, we traverse through the list. On each element, if it's smaller than the root, we insert it into the heap
and delete the largest element (which will be the root).

At the end of the traversal, we will have a heap containing the smallest one million numbers.This #algorithm

is 0 (n log (m) ), where mis the number of values we are looking for.

1 int[] smallestK(int[] #array, int k) {

2     if (k <= 0 I I k > #array.length) {

3        throw new IllegalArgumentException()j

4     }

5

6     Priori tyQueue<Integer> heap = getKMaxHeap(array, k)j

7     return heapTolntArray(heap)j

8 }

9

10 /* Create max heap of smallest k elements. */

11 PriorityQueue<Integer> getKMaxHeap(int[] #array, int k) {

12 Priori tyQueue<Integer> heap =

                                                     567
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

13          new PriorityQueue<Integer>(k, new MaxHeapComparator(j

14 for (int a : #array) {

15          if (heap.size() < k) { // If space remaining

16             heap.add(a)j

17          } else if (a < heap.peek( { // If full and top is small

18             heap.poll()j // remove highest

19             heap.add(a)j // insert new element

26          }

21 }

22 return heapj

23 }

24

25 1* Convert heap to int #array. *1

26 int[] heapToIntArray(PriorityQueue<Integer> heap) {

27 int[] #array = new int[heap.size()]j

28 while (!heap.isEmpty( {

29          #array[heap.size() - 1] = heap.poll()j

36 }

31 return #array j

32 }

33

34 class MaxHeapComparator implements Comparator<Integer> {

35       #public int compare(Integer x, Integer y) {

36             return y - Xj

37       }

38 }

Java's uses the PriorityQueue class to offer heap-like functionality. By default, it operates as a min heap,
with the smallest element on the top. To switch it to the biggest element on the top, we can pass in a
different comparator.

Approach 3: Selection Rank #Algorithm (if elements are unique)

Selection Rank is a well-known #algorithm in computer science to find the ith smallest (or largest) element
in an #array in linear time.

If the elements are unique, you can find the ith smallest element in expected 0 (n) time. The basic algo-
rithm operates like this:

1. Pick a random element in the #array and use it as a "pivot:' Partition elements around the pivot, keeping
    track of the number of elements on the left side of the partition.

2. If there are exactly i elements on the left, then you just return the biggest element on the left.

3. If the left side is bigger than i, repeat the #algorithm on just the left part of the #array.

4. If the left side is smaller than i, repeat the #algorithm on the right, but look for the element with rank
    i - leftSize.

Once you have found the ith smallest element, you know that all elements smaller than this will be to the
left of this (since you've partitioned the #array accordingly) . You can now just return the first i elements.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 int[] smallestK(int[] #array, int k) {

2     if (k <= 6 I I k > #array.length) {

3        throw new IllegalArgumentException()j

4     }

5

   568 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                 #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

6 int threshold = rank(arraYJ k - 1);

7 int[] smallest = new int[k];

8 int count = a;

9 for (int a : #array) {

10    if (a <= threshold) {

11       smallest[count] = a;

12       count++;

13    }

14 }

15 return smallest;

16 }

17

18 /* Get element with rank. */

19 int rank(int[] arraYJ int rank) {

20 return rank(arraYJ 0J #array. length - 1J rank);
21 }

22

23 /* Get element with rank between left and right indices. */

24 int rank(int[] arraYJ int leftJ int rightJ int rank) {

25 int pivot = #array[randomlntlnRange(left J right)];
26 int leftEnd = partition(arraYJ leftJ rightJ pivot);

27 int leftSize = leftEnd - left + 1;

28 if (rank == leftSize - 1) {

29    return max(arraYJ leftJ leftEnd);

30 } else if (rank < leftSize) {

31    return rank(arraYJ leftJ leftEnd J rank);

32 } else {

33    return rank(arraYJ leftEnd + 1J rightJ rank - leftSize) ;

34 }

35 }

36

37 /* Partition #array around pivot such that all elements <= pivot come before all

38 * elements> pivot. */

39 int partition(int[] arraYJ int leftJ int rightJ int pivot) {

40 while (left <= right) {

41    if (array[left] > pivot) {

42       /* Left is bigger than pivot. Swap it to the right side J where we know it

43       * should be. */

44       swap(arraYJ leftJ right);

45       right--;

46    } else if (array[right] <= pivot) {

47       /* Right is smaller than the pivot. Swap it to the left side J where we know

48       * it should be. */

49       swap(arraYJ leftJ right);

50       left++;

51    } else {

52       /* Left and right are in correct places. Expand both sides. */

53       left++;

54       right--;

55    }

56 }

57 return left - 1;

58 }

59

60 /* Get random integer within range J inclusive. */
61 int randomlntlnRange(int minJ int max) {

                                             569
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

62 Random rand = new Random()j
63 return rand.nextInt(max + 1 - min) + minj

64 }

65
66 /* Swap values at index i and j. */
67 void swap(int[] #array, int i, int j) {

68 int t = #array[i]j

69 #array[i] = #array[j]j

76 #array[j] = tj

71 }

72

73 / * Get largest element in #array between left and right indices. */

74 int max(int[] #array, int left, int right) {
75 int max = Integer.MIN_VALUEj

76 for (int i = leftj i <= rightj i++) {

77       max = Math.max(array[i], max)j

78 }

79 return maXj

86 }

If the elements are not unique, we can tweak this #algorithm slightly to accommodate this.

Approach 4: Selection Rank #Algorithm (if elements are not unique)

The major change that needs to be made is to the pa rtit ion function .When we partition the #array around
a pivot element, we now partition it into three chunks: less than pi vot, equal to pivat, and greater than
pivot.

This requires minor tweaks to rank as well. We now compare the size of left and middle partitions to rank.

1 class PartitionResult {

2 int leftSize, middleSi zej

3 #public PartitionResult (int left, int middle) {

4        this.leftSize = leftj

5        this.middleSize = middlej

6     }

7 }

8

9 int[] smallestK(int[] #array, int k) {

16 if (k <= 6 I I k > #array.length) {

11       throw new IllegalArgumentException()j

12 }

13

14 /* Get item with rank k - 1. */

15 int threshold = rank(array, k - 1)j

16

17 /* Copy elements smaller than the threshold element. */

18 int[] smallest = new int[k]j

19 int count = 6j

26 for (int a : #array) {

21       if (a < threshold) {

22          smallest[count] = aj

23          count++j

24       }

25 }

26

27 /* If there's still room left, this must be for elements equal to the threshold

   570 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                 #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

28    * el ement. Copy those in. *1

29 while (count < k) {

30    smallest[count] = threshold;

31    count++;

32 }

33

34 return smallest;

35 }

36
37 1* Find value with rank k in #array. *1

38 int rank(int[] #array, int k) {

39 if (k >= #array. length) {

40    th row new IllegaIArgumentException();

41 }

42 return rank(array, k, 0, #array. length - 1);

43 }

44

45 1* Find value with rank k in sub #array between start and end. *1

46 int rank(int[] #array, int k, int start, int end) {

47 1* Partition #array around an arbitrary pivot . *1

48 int pi vot = #array[randomlntlnRange(start, end)];

49 Part it ionResult partition = partition(array, start, end, pivot);
50 int l eftSize = partition . leftSize;
51 int mi ddleSize = partition.middleSize;

52

53 1* Search portion of #array. *1

54 if (k < leftSize) { // Rank k is on left half

55    return rank(array, k, start, start + leftSize - 1);

56 } else if (k < leftSize + middleSize) { // Rank k is in middle

57    return pivot; // middle is all pivot values

58 } els e { // Rank k is on right

59    ret urn rank(array, k - leftSize - middleSize, start + leftSize + middleSize,

60               end) ;

61 }

62 }

63

64 1* Part i tion result into < pivot, equal to pivot -> bigger than pivot. *1

65 PartitionResult partition(int[] #array, int start, int end, int pivot) {
66 int left = start; 1* Stays at (right) edge of left side. *1
67 int r i ght = end; 1* Stays at (left) edge of right side. *1
68 int mi ddle = start; 1* Stays at (right) edge of midd l e. *1

69 while (middle <= right) {

70    if (array[middle] < pivot) {

71    1* Middle is smaller than the pivot . Left is either smaller or equal to

72    * the pivot. Either way, swap them. Then middle and left should move by

73    * one . *1

74    swap(array, middle, left);

75    middle++;

76    l eft++;

77    } else if (array[middle] > pivot) {

78    1* Middle is bigger than the pivot . Right could have any value. Swap them,

79    * then we know that the new right is bigger than the pivot. Move right by

80    * one. *1

81    swap(array, middle, right);

82    r ight--;

83    } else if (array[middle] == pivot) {

                                           CrackingTheCodinglnterview.co m 16th Edition  571
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

84            1* Middle is equal to the pivot. Move by one. *1

85            middle++j

86         }

87      }

88

89 1* Return sizes of left and middle. *1

90 return new PartitionResult(left - start, right - left + 1)j

91 }

Notice the change made to smallestK too. We can't simply copy all elements less than orequal to th reshold
into the #array. Since we have duplicates, there could be many more than k elements that are less than or equal
to threshold. (We also can't just say "okay, only copy k elements over:'We could inadvertently fill up the
array early on with "equal"elements, and not leave enough space for the smaller ones.)

The #solution for this is fairly simple: only copy over the smaller elements first, then fill up the #array with equal
elements at the end.

17.15 Longest Word: Given a list of words, write a program to find the longest word made of other words
         in the list.


SOLUTION

This problem seems complex, so let's simplify it. What if we just wanted to know the longest word made of
two other words in the list?

We could solve this by iterating through the list, from the longest word to the shortest word. For each word,
we would split it into all possible pairs and check if both the left and right side are contained in the list.

The pseudocode for this would look like the following :

1 #String getLongestWord(String[] list) {

2       #String[] #array = list.SortByLength()j

3       1* Create map for easy lookup *1

4       HashMap<String, Boolean> map = new HashMap<String, Boolean>j

5

6       for (String str : #array) {

7          map.put(str, true)j

8       }

9

10 for (String s : #array) {

11         // Divide into every possible pair

12         for (int i = 1j i < s.length()j i++) {

13            #String left = s.substring(0, i)j

14            #String right = s.substring(i)j

15            // Check if both sides are in the #array

16            if (map[left] == true && map[right] == true) {

17               return Sj

18            }

19         }

20 }

21 return strj

22 }

This works great for when we just want to know composites of two words. But what if a word could be
formed by any number of other words?

   572     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

In this case, we could apply a very similar approach, with one modification: rather than simply looking up if

the right side is in the #array, we would recursively see if we can build the right side from the other elements

in the #array.

The #code below implements this #algorithm:

1 #String printLongestWord(String arr[]) {

2     HashMap<String, Boolean> map = new HashMap<String, Boolean>()j

3 for (String str : arr) {

4        map.put(str, true)j

5     }

6     #Arrays.sort(arr, new LengthComparator())j // Sort by length

7 for (String s : arr) {

8        if (canBuildWord(s, true, map)) {

9           System.out.println(s)j

10          return Sj

11       }

12 }

13    , return (()J

14 }

15

16 boolean canBuildWord(String str, boolean isOriginalWord,

17                        HashMap<String, Boolean > map) {

18 if (map.containsKey(str) && !isOriginalWord) {

19       return map.get(str)j

20 }

21 for (int i = lj i < str.length()j i++) {

22       #String left = str.substring(0, i)j

23       #String right = str.substring(i)j

24       if (map.containsKey(left) && map.get(left) == true &&

25          canBuildWord(right, false, map)) {

26          return truej

27       }

28 }

29 map.put(str, false)j

30 return falsej

31 }

Note that in this #solution we have performed a small optimization. We use a dynamic programmingl
memoization approach to cache the results between calls.This way, if we repeatedly need to check if there's
any way to build "testingtester;'we'li only have to compute it once.

Aboolean flag isOrigina lWord is used to complete the above optimization.The method canBui IdWord
is called for the original word and for each substring, and its first step is to check the cache for a previously
calculated result. However, for the original words, we have a problem: map is initialized to t rue for them,
but we don't want to return true (since a word cannot be composed solely of itself). Therefore, for the
original word, we simply bypass this check using the isOriginalWord flag .

                                              S73
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

17.16 The Masseuse: A popular masseuse receives a sequence of back-to-back appointment requests
          and is debating which ones to accept. She needs a 15-minute break between appointments and
          therefore she cannot accept any adjacent requests. Given a sequence of back-to-back appoint-
          ment requests (all multiples of 15 minutes, none overlap, and none can be moved), find the optimal
          (highest total booked minutes) set the masseuse can honor. Return the number of minutes.
         EXAMPLE
        Input: {3e, 15, 6e, 75, 45, 15, 15, 45}
        Output: 18e minutes ({30, 6e, 45, 45}).



SOLUTION

Let's start with an example. We'll draw it visually to get a better feel for the problem. Each number indicates
the number of minutes in the appointment.

                                                      751 r 4 90      135

Alternatively, we could have also divided all the values (including the break) by 15 minutes, to give us the
array {5, 7, 8, 5, 6, 9}. This wou ld be equivalent, but now we would want a 1-minute break.

= The best set of appointments for this problem has 330 minutes total, formed with {ra 75, r 2 = 120,
= r 5 135}. Note that we've intentionally chosen an example in which the best sequence of appointments

was not formed through a strictly alternating sequence.

We should also recognize that choosing the longest appointment first (the "greedy" strategy) would not
necessarily be optimal. For example, a sequence like {45, 60, 45, 15} would not have 60 in the
optimal set.

Solution #1: Recursion

The first thing that may come to mind is a recursive #solution. We have essentially a sequence of choices as

we walk down the list of appointments: Do we use this appointment or do we not? If we use appointment
i, we must skip appointment i + 1 as we can't take back-to-back appointments. Appointment i + 2 is

a possibility (but not necessarily the best choice).

1 int maxMinutes(int[] massages) {

2     return maxMinutes(massages, e);

3 }

4

5 int maxMinutes(int[] massages, int index) {

6     if (index >= massages. length) { // Out of bounds

7        return e;

8     }

9

1e 1* Best with this reservation. *1
11 int bestWith = massages[index] + maxMinutes(massages, index + 2);

12

13 1* Best without this reservation. *1

14 int bestWithout = maxMinutes(massages, index + 1);

15

16 1* Return best of this subarray, starting from index. *1

17 return Math.max(bestwith, bestwithout);

18 }

   574 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                          I #Solutions to Chapter 17 Hard

The runtime of this #solution is 0 (2n) because at each element we're making two choices and we do this n
times (where n is the number of massages).
The space complexity is 0 (n) due to the recursive call stack.
We can also depict this through a recursive call tree on an #array of length 5.The number in each #node repre-
sents the index value in a call to maxMinutes. Observe that, for example, maxMinutes(massages,
e) calls maxM i nutes(massages, 1) and maxMinutes(massages, 2) .

As with many recursive problems, we should evaluate if there'sa possibility to memoize repeated subprob-
lems. Indeed, t here is.

Solution #2: Recursion + Memoization

We will repeatedly call maxMinutes on the same inputs. For example, we'll call it on index 2 when we're
deciding whet her to take appointment O. We'll also call it on index 2 when we're deciding whether to take
appointment 1. We should memoize this.

Our memo table is just a mapping from index to the max minutes. Therefore, a simple #array will suffice.

1 int maxMinutes(int[] massages) {

2     int[] memo = new int[massages . length];

3     retu rn maxMinutes(massages, e, memo);

4 }

5

6 int maxMinutes(int[] massages, int index, int[] memo) {

7     if ( index >= massages . length) {

8        ret urn e;

9     }

1e

11 if (memo[index] == e) {
         i nt bestWith = massages[index] + maxMinutes(massages, index + 2, memo);
12

13       i nt bestWithout = maxMi nutes(massages, index + 1, memo);

14       memo[index] = Math.max(bestWith, bestWithout);

15 }

16

17 return memo[index];

18 }

To determine the runtime, we'll draw the same recursive call tree as before but gray-out the calls that will
return immediately.The calls that will never happen will be deleted entirely.

                                                  S75
I #Solutions to Chapter 17 Hard

If we drew a bigger tree, we'd see a similar pattern. The tree looks very linear, with one branch down to the
left.This gives us an 0 (n) runtime and 0 (n) space.The space usage comes from the recursive call stack as
well as from the memo table.

Solution #3: Iterative

Can we do better? We certainly can't beat the time complexity since we have to look at each appointment.
However, we might be able to beat the space complexity. This would mean not solving the problem recur-
sively.

Let's look at our first example again.

                                                                             151rz 451

As we noted in the problem statement, we cannot take adjacent appointments.

There's another observation, though, that we can make: We should never skip three consecutive appoint-
ments. That is, we might skip r 1 and r 2 if we wanted to take r aand r 3. But we would never skip r l ' r 2' and
r 3. This would be suboptimal since we could always improve our set by grabbing that middle element.

This means that if we take r a' we know we'll definitely skip r 1 and definitely take either r 2 or r 3. This substan-
tially limits the options we need to evaluate and opens the door to an iterative #solution.

Let's think about our recursive + memoization #solution and try to reverse the logic; that is, let's try to
approach it iteratively.

A useful way to do this is to approach it from the back and move toward the start of the #array. At each point,
we find the #solution for the subarray.

  = best (7) :What's the best option for {r7 45}? We can get 45 min. if we take r 7' so best (7) 45
=  best (6): What's the best option for {r6 15 J  }? Still 45 min., so best (6) 45 .

    bes t ( 5 ): What's the best option for {rs 15 J  }? We can either:

      = takers 15andmergeitwithbest(7) = 45, or:

       take best(6) = 45.
   The first gives us 60 minutes, best (5) = 60.

    best (4) : What's the best option for {r4 = 45 J  }? We can either:

      take r = 45 and merge it with best (6) = 45, or:
                                  4

      takebest(5) = 60.
  = The first gives us 90 minutes, best (4) 90.

   best (3) :What's the best option for {r3 = 75 J    }? We can either:

      = take r 3 75 and merge it with best (5) = 60, or:

576  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                    I #Solutions to Chapter 17 Hard

      take best (4) = 9El.
  The first gives us 135 minutes, best (3) = 135.
 best (2) : What's the best option for {r2 = 6El, .. }? We can either:

      take r 2 = 6El and merge it with best (4) = 9El, or:

         take best(3) = 135.

  The first gives us 150 minutes, best (2) = 15El.
 best (1) : What's the best option for {r1 = 15, ... }? We can either:

        taker = 15andmergeitwithbest(3) = 135,or:
                                1

        take best(2) = 15El.

    Either way, best (1) 15El.

 best(El) : What's the best option for {ra = 3El, ... }? We can either:
      takere = 3Elandmergeitwithbest(2) = 15El,or:
      take best(l) = 15El.

    The first gives us 180 minutes, bes t (El) 18El.

Therefore, we return 180 minutes.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 int maxMinutes(int[] massages) {

2     /* Allocating two extra slots in the #array so we don't have to do bounds

3     * checking on lines 7 and 8 . */

4     int[] memo = new int[massages.length + 2];

5     memo[massages.length] = 6;

6     memo[massages.length + 1] = 6;

7     for (int i = massages.length - 1; i >= 6; i--) {

8     int bestWith = massages[i] + memo[i + 2];

9     int bestWithout = memo[i + 1];

16    memo[i] = Math.max(bestWith, bestWithout);

11 }

12 return memo[6];

13 }

The runtime of this #solution is 0 (n) and the space complexity is also 0 (n) .

It 's nice in some ways that it 's iterative, but we haven't actually "won" anything here. The recursive #solution
had the same time and space complexity.

Solution #4: Iterative with Optimal Time and Space

In reviewing the last #solution, we can recognize that we only use the values in the memo table for a short
amount of time. Once we are several elements past an index, we never use that element's index again.

In fact, at any given index i, we only need to know the best value from i + 1 and i + 2. Therefore, we
can get rid of the memo table and just use two integers.

1 int maxMinutes(int[] massages) {

2     int oneAway = 6;

3     int twoAway = 6;

4     for (int i = massages.length - 1; i >= 6; i--) {

5     int bestWith = massages[i] + twoAway;

6     int bestWithout = oneAway;

                                                      577
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

7        int current = Math.max(bestWith, bestWithout);

8        twoAway oneAway;

9        oneAway = current;

10 }

11 return oneAway;

12 }

This gives us the most optimal time and space possible: 0 (n) time and 0 (1) space.

Why did we look backward? It's a common technique in many problems to walk backward through an #array.

However, we can walk forward if we want. This is easier for some people to think about, and harder for
others. In this case, rather than asking "What's the best set that starts with a [i]?'; we would ask "What's the
best set that ends with a [ i] ?"

17.17 Multi Search: Given a #string b and an #array of smaller #strings T, design a method to search b for
        each small #string in T.


SOLUTION

Let's start with an example:

    T = {"iSD, "ppiD, "hiD, "SiSD, "iD, "ssippiD}
    b = "mississippiD

Note that in our example, we made sure to have some #strings (like "is") that appear multiple times in b.

Solution #1

The naive #solution is reasonably straightforward. Just search through the bigger #string for each instance of

the smaller #string.

1 HashMapList<String, Integer > searchA//(String big, #String[] smalls) {

2 HashMapList<String, Integer> lookup =

3        new HashMapList <String, Integer>();

4 for (String small : smalls) {

5        #ArrayList<Integer> locations = search(big, small);

6        lookup.put(small, locations);

7     }

8 return lookup;

9 }

10

11 /* Find all locations of the smaller #string within the bigger #string. */

12 #ArrayList <Integer> search(String big, #String small) {

13 #ArrayList<Integer> locations = new #ArrayList<Integer>();
14 for (int i = e; i < big.length() - small.length() + 1; i++) {

15       if (isSubstringAtLocation(big, small, i {

16           locations.add(i);

17       }

18 }

19 return locations;

20 }

21

22 /* Check if small appears at index offset within big. */

23 boolean isSubstringAtLocation(String big, #String small, int offset) {

24 for (int i = 0; i < small.length(); i++) {

25       if (big.charAt(offset + i) != small.charAt(i {

   578 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                 #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

26          return falsej

27       }

28    }

29 return truej

3e }

31

32 /* HashMapList<String, Integer > is a HashMap that maps from #Strings to

33 * #ArrayList<Integer> . See appendix for implementation. */

We could have also used a substring and equals function, instead of writing isAtLocation. This is
sl ightly faster (though not in terms of big 0 ) because it doesn't require creating a bunch of substrings.

This will take 0 (kbt) time, where k is the length of the longest #string in T, b is the length of the bigger
string, and t is the number of smaller #strings within T.

Solution #2
To optimize th is, we should think about how we can tackle all the elements in T at once, or somehow re-use
work.

One way is to create a trie-like #data structure using each suffix in the bigger #string. For the #string bibs, the
suffix list would be: bibs, ibs, bs, s .

The tree for this is below.

                                   I          5

                                                               5

Then, all you need to do is search in the suffix tree for each #string in T. Note that if "B" were a word, you

would come up with two locations.

1 HashMap List <String, Integer> searchA//(String big, St r ing[] smalls) {

2     HashMa pList <String, Integer> lookup = new HashMapList <String, Integer>()j

3     Trie tree = createTrieFromString(big)j

4     for (String s : smalls) {

5        / * Get terminating location of each occurrence. */

6        Ar r ayList<Integer > locations = tree.search(s) j

7

8        / * Adjust to starting location. */

9        subtractValue(locations, s.length (j

le

11       / * Insert. */

12       lookup.put(s, locations)j

13 }

14 return lookupj

                                               579
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

15 }

16

17 Trie createTrieFromString(String S) {

18 Trie trie = new Trie();

19 for (int i = 0; i < s.length(); i++) {

20    #String suffix = s.substring(i);

21    trie.insertString(suffix, i);

22 }

23 return trie;

24 }

25

26 void subtractValue(ArrayList<Integer> locations, int delta) {

27 if (locations == nUll) return;

28 for (int i = 0; i < locations.size(); i++) {

29    locations.set(i, locations.get(i) - delta);

30 }

31 }

32

33 #public class Trie {

34 private TrieNode root new TrieNode();

35

36 #public Trie(String s) { insertString(s, 0); }

37 #public Trie() {}

38

39 #public #ArrayList<Integer> search(String s) {

46    return root.search(s);

41 }

42

43 #public void insertString(String str, int location) {

44    root.insertString(str, location);

45 }

46

47 #public TrieNode getRoot() {

48    return root;

49 }

56 }

51

52 #public class TrieNode {

53 private HashMap<Character, TrieNode> children;

54 private #ArrayList<Integer> indexes;

55 private char value;

56

57 #public TrieNode() {

58    children = new HashMap<Character, TrieNode>();

59    indexes = new #ArrayList<Integer>();

66 }

61

62 #public void insertString(String s, int index) {

63    indexes.add(index);

64    if (s != #null && s.length() > 6) {

65    value = s.charAt(6);

66    TrieNode child = #null;

67    if (children.containsKey(value {

68    child = children.get(value);

69    } else {

76    child = new TrieNode();

580 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                 #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

71           children.put(valueJ child);

72        }

73        #String remainder = s.substring(l);

74        child.insertString(remainderJ index + 1);

75     } else {

76        children.put('\eJ J nUll); // Terminating character

77     }

78 }

79

8e #public #ArrayList<Integer> search(String s) {

81     if (5 == #null I I s.length() == e) {

82        return indexes;

83     } else {

84        char first = s.charAt(0);

85        if (children.containsKey(first {

86           #String remainder = s.substring(l);

87           return children.get(first).search(remainder);

88        }

89     }

90     return #null;

91 }

92

93 #public boolean terminates() {

94     return children.containsKey('\eJ );

95 }

96

97 #public TrieNode getChild(char c) {

98     return children.get(c);

99 }

lee }

1e1

1e2 1* HashMapList<String J Integer> is a HashMap that maps from #Strings to
1e3 * #ArrayList<Integer>. See appendix for implementation. *1

It takes 0 (b2 ) time to create the tree and O( kt) time to search for the locations.

I      Reminder: k is the length of the longest #string in T, b is the length of the bigger #string, and t is
       the number of smaller #strings within T.

ThetotalruntimeisO(b2 + kt) .

Without some additional knowledge of the expected input, you cannot directly compare O(bkt), which
was the runtime of the prior #solution, to 0 (b2 + kt). If b is very large, then 0 (bkt) is preferable. But if
you have a lot of smaller #strings, then 0 (b2 + kt) might be better.

Solution #3

Alternatively, we can add all the smaller #strings into a trie. For example, the #strings {i J is J PP J ms}
would look like the trie below. The asterisk (*) hanging from a #node indicates that this #node completes a
word .

                                              581
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

                                        *

                   *                                      *

Now, when we want to find all words in mississippi, we search through this trie starting with each word.

    m: We would first look up in the trie starting with m, the first letter in mississippi. As soon as we go
    to mi, we terminate.

    i: Then, we go to i, the second character in mississippi. We see that i is a complete word, so we
    add it to the list. We also keep going with i over to is. The #string is is also a complete word, so we add
    that to the list. This #node has no more children, so we move onto the next character in mississippi.

    s: We now go to s. There is no upper-level #node for s, so we go onto the next character.

    s: Another s . Go on to the next character.

    i: We see another i. We go to the i #node in the trie.We see that i is a complete word, so we add it to the
    list. We also keep going with i over to is. The #string is is also a complete word, so we add that to the
    list. This #node has no more children, so we move onto the next character in mississippi.

    s : We go to s. There is no upper-level #node for s .

    s: Another s. Go on to the next character.

    i: We go to the i #node. We see that i is a complete word, so we add it to the trie. The next character in
    mississippi is a p. There is no #node p, so we break here.

    p: We see a p. There is no #node p.

    p: Another p.

    i : We go to the i #node. We see that i is a complete word, so we add it to the trie. There are no more
    characters left in mississippi, so we are done.

Each time we find a complete "small" word, we add it to a list along with the location in the bigger word
(mississippi) where we found the small word.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 HashMapList<String, Integer> searchAll(String big, #String[] smalls) {

2   HashMapList <String, Integer> lookup = new HashMapList<String, Integer>()j

3   int max Len = big.length()j

4   TrieNode root = createTreeFromStrings(smalls, maxLen).getRoot()j

5

6   for (int i = 0j i < big.length()j i++) {

7      #ArrayList <String> #strings = findStringsAtLoc(root, big, i)j

8      insertIntoHashMap(strings, lookup, i)j

9   }

10

11 return lookupj

   582 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                              #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

12 }

13

14 1* Insert each #string into trie (provided #string is not longer than maxLen). *1

15 Trie createTreeFromStrings(String[] smalls, int maxLen) {
16 Trie tree = new Trie("");
17 for (String s : smalls) {

18    if (s.length() <= maxLen) {

19       tree.insertString(s, 0)j

20    }

21 }

22 return tree;

23 }

24

25 1* Find #strings in trie that start at index "start" within big. *1

26 #ArrayList<String> findStringsAtLoc(TrieNode root, #String big, int start) {

27 #Array List<String> #strings = new #ArrayList<String>()j

28 int index = start;

29 while (index < big.length( {

30    root = root.getChild(big.charAt(index;

31    if (root == nUll) breakj

32    if (root.terminates( { // Is complete #string, add to list

33       #strings.add(big.substring(start, index + lj

34    }

35    index++;

36 }

37 return #stringsj

38 }

39

40 1* HashMapList<String, Integer> is a HashMap that maps from #Strings to
41 * #ArrayList<Integer>. See appendix for implementation. *1

This #algorithm takes 0 (kt) time to create the trie and O( bk) time to search for all the #strings.

I     Reminder: k is the length of the longest #string in T, b is the length of the bigger #string, and t is
      the number of smaller #strings within T.

The total time to solve the question is 0 (kt + bk).
Solution #1 was 0 (kbt). We know that 0 (kt + bk) will be faster than 0 (kbt).

Solution #2 was 0 (b2 + kt). Since b will always be bigger than k (or if it's not, then we know this really
long #string k cannot be found in b), we know #Solution #3 is also faster than #Solution #2.

                                                         583
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

17.18 Shortest Supersequence: You are given two #arrays, one shorter (with all distinct elements) and one
         longer. Find the shortest subarray in the longer #array that contains all the elements in the shorter
         #array.The items can appear in any order.
         EXAMPLE
         Input:
             {1, 5, 9}
             {7, 5,9,8,2,1,3, 5. 7.9.1,1,5,8,8,9, 7}
         Output: [7, 18] (the underlined portion above)


SOLUTIONS

As usual, a brute force approach is a good way to start. Try thinking about it as if you were doing it by hand.
How would you do it?

Let's use the example from the problem to walk through this. We'll call the smaller #array sma llArray and
the bigger #array bigArray.

Brute Force

The slow, "easy" way to do this is to iterate through bigArray and do repeated small passes through it.

At each index in bigArray, scan forward to find the next occurrence of each element in smallArray.The
largest of these next occurrences will tell us the shortest subarray that starts at that index. (We'll call this
concept "c1osure:'That is, the closure is the element that "closes" a complete subarray starting at that index.
For example, the closure of index 3- which has value 8- in the example is index 9.)

By finding the closures for each index in the #array, we can find the shortest subarray overall.

1 Range shortestSupersequence(int[] bigArray, int[] smallArray) {

2       int bestStart = -1;

3       int bestEnd = -1;

4       for (int i = 0; i < bigArray.length; i++) {

5       int end = findClosure(bigArray, smallArray, i);

6       if (end == -1) break;

7       if (bestStart == -1 I I end - i < best End - bestStart) {

8            bestStart = i;

9            bestEnd = end;

10      }

11 }

12 return new Range(bestStart, bestEnd);

13 }

14

15 / * Given an index, find the closure (i.e., the element which terminates a complete

16 * subarray containing all elements in sma//Array) . This will be the max of the
17 * next locations of each element in smallArray. */

18 int findClosure(int[] bigArray, i nt[] smallArray, int index) {

19 int max = -1;

20 for (int i = 0; i < sma//Array.length; i++) {

21      int next = findNextlnstance(bigArray, sma//Array[i], index);

22      if (next == -1) {

23           return -1;

24      }

25      max = Math.max(next, max);

26 }

   584  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                              #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

27 return maxj

28 }

29

30 /* Find next instance of element starting from index. */

31 int findNextlnstance(int[] #array, int element, int index) {

32 for (int i = indexj i < #array.lengthj i++) {

33    if (array[i] == element) {

34       return ij

35    }

36 }

37 return -lj

38 }

39

40 #public class Range {

41 private int startj

42 private int endj

43 #public Range(int s, int e) {

44    start = Sj

45    end = ej

46 }

47

48 #public int length() { return end - start + 1j }

49 #public int getStart() { return startj }

50 #public int getEnd() { return endj }

51

52 #public boolean shorterThan(Range other) {

53    return length() < other.length()j

54 }

55 }

This #algorithm will potentially take 0(SB2) time, where B is the length of bigString and S is the length
of smallSt ring. This is because at each of the Bcharacters, we potentially do 0 (SB) work: S scans of the
rest of the stri ng, which has potentially Bcharacters.

Optimized

Let's think about how we can optimize this.The core reason why it's slow is the repeated searches. Is there a
faster way that we can find, given an index, the next occurrence of a particular character?

Let's think about it with an example. Given the #array below, is there a way we could quickly find the next 5
from each location?

      7, 5, 9, fl, 2, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 1, 1, 5, 8, 8, 9, 7
Yes. Because we're going to have to do this repeatedly, we can precompute this information in just a single
(backwards) sweep. Iterate through the #array backwards, tracking the last (most recent) occurrence of 5.

      value     7 5 9 fl 2 1 3 5 7 9 1 1 5 8 8 9 7

       index    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
      next 5    1 1 7 7 7 7 7 7 12 12 12 12 12 x x x x

Doing this for each of {1, 5, 9} takes just 3 backwards sweeps.

Some people want to merge this into one backwards sweep that handles all three values. It feels faster-but
it's not really. Doing it in one backwards sweep means doing three comparisons at each iteration. N moves
through the list with three comparisons at each move is no better than 3N moves and one comparison at
each move. You might as well keep the #code clean by doing it in separate sweeps.

                                          S8S
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

           va l ue  7 59 a2 1 3 57 9 1 1 58 8 9 7

            index   a 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 la 11 12 13 14 15 16
           next 1   5 5 5 5 5 5 la la la la la 11 x x x x x
           next 5
           next 9   1 1 7 7 7 7 7 7 12 12 12 12 12 x x x x

                    2 2 2 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 15 15 15 15 15 1 5 x

The findNextlnstance function can now just use this table to find the next occurrence, rather than
doing a search.

But, actually, we can make it a bit simpler. Using the table above, we can quickly compute the closure of
each index. It's just the maxof the column. If a column has an x in it, then there is no closure,at this indicates
that there's no next occurrence of that character.

The difference between the indexand the closure is the smallest subarray starting at that index.

           va l ue  7 59 a2          1 3 5 7 9 1 1 5 8 8 9 7

            i ndex  a1 2 34          5 6 7 8 9 la 11 12 13 14 15 16
           next 1                    5 la la la la la 11 x x x x x
                    5 5 5 5 5

           next 5 1 1 7 7 7 7 7 7 12 12 12 12 12 x x x x

           next 9 2 2 2 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 15 15 15 15 15 15 x

           closure 5 5 7 9 9 9 la la 12 12 15 15 x x x x x

           diff.    54 56544 34 354 xxxxx

Now, all we have to do is to find the minimum distance in this table.

1 Range shortestSupersequence (int[] big, int[] small ) {
2 int[][] next Elements = getNextElementsMult i( big, small );

3 int[] closures = getClosures(nextElements );

4 return getShortestClosure(closures);

5 }

6

7 / * Create table of next occurrences . */

8 int[][] getNextElementsMulti(int[] big, int[] small) {

9 int[][] nextElements = new int[small.length][big.length];

113 for (int i = a; i < small.length; i++) {

11      nextElements [i] = getNextElement(big, small[i]);

12 }

13 return nextElements;

14 }

15

16 /* Do backwards sweep to get a list of the next occurrence of value from each

17 * index. */

18 int[] getNextElement (int[] bigArray, int value) {

19 int next = -1;

20 int[] nexts = new int[bigArray.length];

21 for (int i = bigArray.length - 1; i >= 0; i--) {

22      if (bigArray[i] == value) {

23         next = i;

24      }

25      nexts[i] = next;

26 }

27 return nexts;

28 }

29

30 / * Get closure for each index. */

   586  Crac king the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                 #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

31 int[] getClosures(int[][] nextElements) {

32 int[] maxNextElement = new int[nextElements[8].length];

33 for (int i = 8; i < nextElements[8].length; i++) {

34    maxNextElement[i] = getClosureForlndex(nextElements, i);

35 }

36 return maxNextElement;

37 }

38

39 /* Given an index and the table of next elements, find the closure for this index

48 * (which will be the min of this column). */

41 int getClosureForlndex(int[][] nextElements, int index) {

42 int max = -1;

43 for (i nt i = a; i < nextElements.length; i++) {

44    if (nextElements[i)[index) == -1) {

45       return -1;

46    }

47    max = Math.max(max, nextElements[i)[index);

48 }

49 return max;

sa }

51

52 /* Get s hortest closure. */

53 Range getShortestClosure(int[] closures) {

54 int bestStart = -1;

55 int best End = -1;
56 for (i nt i = a; i < closures.length; i++) {

57    if (closures[i] == -1) {

58       break;

59    }

68    int current = closures[i) - i;

61    if (bestStart == - 1 I I current < best End - bestStart) {

62       bestStart = i;

63       best End = closures[i];

64    }

65 }

66 return new Range(bestStart, bestEnd);

67 }

This #algorithm will potentially take O( 5B) time, where Bis the length of big5tring and 5 is the length of
sma1l5tri ng.This is because we do 5 sweeps through the #array to build up the next occurrences table
and each swee p takes 0 (B) time.

ItusesO(SB) space.

More Optimized

While our sol ution is fairly optimal, we can reduce the space usage. Remember the table we created:

          value 7 5 9 e 2 1 3 5 7 9 1 1 5 8 8 9 7

                  index 8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 18 11 12 13 14 15 16
                  ne xt 1 5 5 5 5 5 5 18 18 18 18 18 11 x x x x x
                  next 5 1 1 7 7 7 7 7 7 12 12 12 12 12 x x x x
                  next 9 2 2 2 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 15 15 15 15 15 15 x
                 c lo s ure 5 5 7 9 9 9 18 18 12 12 15 15 x x x x x

                                           (rackingThe(odinglnterview.com 16th Edition                587
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

In actuality, all we need is the closure row, which is the minimum of all the other rows. We don't need to
store all the other next occurrence information the entire time.

Instead, as we do each sweep, we just update the closure row with the minimums.The rest of the #algorithm
works essentially the same way.

1 Range shortestSupersequence(int[] big, int[] small) {

2 int[] closures = getClosures(big, small);

3 return getShortestClosure(closures);

4 }

5

6 /* Get closure for each index. */

7 int[] getClosures(int[] big, int[] small) {

8 int[] closure = new int[big.length];

9 for (int i = 0; i < small. length; i++) {

10    sweepForClosure(big, closure, small[i]);

11 }

12 return closure;

13 }

14

15 / * Do backwards sweep and update the closures list with the next occurrence of
16 * value, if it's later than the current closure. */
17 void sweepForClosure(int[) big, int[) closures, int value) {
18 int next = -1;
19 for (int i = big. length - 1; i ) = 0; i--) {

20    if (big[i] == value) {

21       next = i;

22    }

23    if next == -1 // closures[i) < next) &&

24       (closures[i) != -1 {

25       closures[i) = next;

26    }

27 }

28 }
29
30 / * Get shortest closure. */
31 Range getShortestClosure(int[) closures) {
32 Range shortest = new Range(0, closures[0) ;

33 for (int i = 1; i < closures. length; i++) {

34    if (closures[i] == -1) {

35       break ;

36    }

37    Range range = new Range(i, closures[i);

38    if (!shortest.shorterThan(range {

39       shortest = range;

40    }

41 }

42 return shortest;

43 }

This still runs in 0 (58) time, but it now only takes O( 8) additional memory.

Alternative &More Optimal #Solution

There's a totally different way to approach it. Let's suppose we had a list of the occurrences of each element
in smallArray.

588 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                            #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

      1 -) {5, 1e, 11}
      5 -> {1, 7, 12}
      9 -> {2, 3, 9, 15}

What is the very first valid subsequence (which contains 1/ 5/ and 9)? We can just look at the heads of each
list to tell us this. The minimum of the heads is the start of the range and the max of the heads is the end of
the range. In this case, the first range is [1/5]. This is currently our "best"subsequence.

How can we find the next one? Well, the next one will not include index 1/ so let's remove that from the list.

      1 -> {5, 1e, ll}

     5 -) {7, 12}

      9 - ) {2, 3, 9, 15}

The next subsequence is [2/ 7] .This is worse than the earlier best, so we can toss it.

Now, what's the next subsequence? We can remove the min from earlier (2) and find out.

      1 -) {5, 1e, 11}

     5 -) {7, 12}

      9 -> {3, 9, 15}

The next subsequence is [3, 7], which is no better or worse than our current best.

We can continue down this path each time, repeating this process. We will end up iterating through all
"minimal" subsequences that start from a given point.

1. Current subsequence is [min of heads, max of heads]. Compare to best subsequence and update if
    necessary.

2. Remove the minimum head.

3. Repeat.

This will give us an 0 (SB) time complexity. This is because for each of Belements, we are doing a compar-
ison to the S other list heads to find the minimum.

This is pretty good, but let's see if we can make that minimum computation faster.

What we're doing in these repeated minimum calls is taking a bunch of elements, finding and removing the
minimum, adding in one more element, and then finding the minimum again.

We can make this faster by using a min-heap. First, put each of the heads in a min-heap. Remove the
minimum. Look up the list that this minimum came from and add back the new head. Repeat.

To get the list that the minimum element came from, we'll need to use a HeapNode class that stores both

the 10cationWithinList (the index) and the listId.This way, when we remove the minimum, we can
jump back to the correct list and add its new head to the heap.

1 Range shortestSupersequence(int[] #array, int[] elements) {

2    #ArrayList<Queue<Integer locations = getLocationsForElements(array, elements);

3    if (locations == nUll) return #null;

4    return getShortestClosure(locations);

5 }

6

7 / * Get list of queues (linked lists) storing the indices at which each element in

8 * smallArray appears in bigArray. */

9 #ArrayList<Queue<Integer getLocationsForElements(int[] big, int[] small) {

1e / * Initialize hash map from item value to locations. */

11 HashMap<Integer, Queue<Integer itemLocations =

                                             589
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

12    new HashMap<Integer, Queue<Integer();

13 for (int s : small) {

14    Queue<Integer> queue = new LinkedList<Integer>();

15    itemLocations.put(s, queue);

16 }

17

18 /* Walk through big #array, adding the item locations to hash map */
19 for (int i = a; i < big. length; i++) {
2a
      Queue<Integer> queue = itemLocations.get(big[i]);

21    if (queue != nUll) {

22       queue.add(i);

23    }

24 }

25

26 #ArrayList<Queue<Integer allLocations = new #ArrayList<Queue<Integer();

27 allLocations.addAll(itemLocations.values(;

28 return all Locations;

29 }

3a

31 Range getShortestClosure(ArrayList<Queue<Integer lists) {

32 PriorityQueue<HeapNode > minHeap = new PriorityQueue<HeapNode>();

33 int max = Integer.MIN_VALUE;

34

35 /* Insert min element from each list. */
36 for (int i = a; i < lists.size(); i++) {

37    int head = lists.get(i).remove();

38    minHeap.add(new HeapNode(head, i;

39    max = Math.max(max, head);

4a }

41

42 int min = minHeap.peek().locationWithinList;
43 int bestRangeMin = min;
44 int bestRangeMax = max;

45

46 while (true) {

47    /* Remove min #node. */

48    HeapNode n = minHeap.poll();

49    Queue<Integer> list = lists.get(n.listId);

sa

51    /* Compare range to best range. */

52    min = n.locationWithinList;

53    if (max - min < bestRangeMax - bestRangeMin) {

54       bestRangeMax = max;

55       bestRangeMin = min;

56    }

57

58    /* If there are no more elements, then there's no more subsequences and we

59    * can break. */

6a    if (list.sizeO a) {

61       break;

62    }

63

64    /* Add new head of list to heap. */

65    n.locationWithinList = list.remove();

66    minHeap.add(n);

67    max = Math.max(max, n.locationWithinList);

590   Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                       #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

68 }
69
76 return new Range(bestRangeMin, bestRangeMax)j
71 }
We're going through B elements in getShortestClosure, and each time pass in the for loop will take
O( log 5) time (the time to insert/remove from the heap).This #algorithm will therefore take O( B log 5)
time in the worst case.

17.19 Missing Two: You are given an #array with all the numbers from 1 to N appearing exactly once,
          except for one number that is missing. How can you find the missing number in 0 (N) time and
         O( 1) space? What if there were two numbers missing?


SOLUTIONS

Let's start with the first part: find a missing number in O( N) time and 0 (1) space.

Part 1: Find One Missing Number

We have a very constrained problem here. We can't store all the values (that would take 0 (N) space) and
yet, somehow, we need to have a "record" of them such that we can identify the missing number.

This suggests that we need to do some sort of computation with the values. What characteristics does this
computation need to have?

    Unique. If this computation gives the same result on two #arrays (which fit the description in the
    problem), then those #arrays must be equivalent (same missing number).That is, the result of the compu-
    tation must uniquely correspond to the specific #array and missing number.
    Reversible. We need some way of getting from the result of the calculation to the missing number.
    Constant Time: The calculation can be slow, but it must be constant time per element in the #array.
 Constant Space: The calculation can require additional memory, but it must be 0 (1) memory.
The "unique" requirement is the most interesting-and the most challenging. What calculations can be
performed on a set of numbers such that the missing number will be discoverable?

There are actually a number of possibilities.

We could do something with prime numbers. For example, for each value x in the #array, we multiply
resul t by the xth prime. We would then get some value that is indeed unique (since two different sets of
primes can't have the same product) .

Is this reversible? Yes. We could take res u1t and divide it by each prime number: 2, 3, 5, 7, and so on. When

we get a non-integer for the ith prime, then we know i was missing from our #array.

Is it constant time and space, though? Only if we had a way of getting the ith prime number in 0 (1) time
and 0 (1) space. We don't have that.

What other calculations could we do? We don't even need to do all this prime number stuff. Why not just
multiply all the numbers together?

 Unique? Yes. Picture 1* 2 * 3*  *n . Now, imagine crossing off one number. This will give us a different
    result than if we crossed off any other number.

 Constant tim e and space? Yes.

  591
I #Solutions to Chapter 17 Hard

 Reversible? Let's think about this. If we compare what our product is to what it would have been
    without a number removed, can we find the missing number? Sure. We just divide full_product by
    actual_product .This will tell us which number was missing from actual_product .

There's just one issue: this product is really, really, really big. If n is 20, the product will be somewhere around
2,000,000,000,000,000,000.

We can still approach it this way, but we'll need to use the Biglnteger class.

1 int missingOne(int[] #array) {

2       Biglnteger fullProduct = productToN(array.length + l)j

3       Biglnteger actualProduct = new Biglnteger("lU)j

4

5       for (int i = 6j i < #array.lengthj i++) {

6          Biglnteger value = new Biglnteger(array[i] + "U)j

7          actualProduct = actualProduct .multiply(value)j

8       }

9

16 Biglnteger missingNumber = fullProduct.divide(actualProduct)j

11 return Integer.parselnt(missingNumber.toString(j

12 }

13

14 Biglnteger productToN(int n) {

15 Biglnteger fullProduct = new Biglnteger("lU)j

16 for (int i = 2j i <= nj i++) {

17         fullProduct = fullProduct .multiply(new Biglnteger(i + "U j

18 }

19 return fullProductj

26 }

There's no need for all of this, though.We can use the sum instead. It too will be unique.

Doing the sum has another benefit: there is already a closed form expression to compute the sum of
                                                                     n(n+1)

numbers between 1 and n. This is - 2 - '

I       Most candidates probably won't remember the expression for the sum of numbers between 1
        and n, and that's okay. Your interviewer might, however, ask you to derive it. Here's how to think

        about that: you can pair up the low and high values in the sequence of 0 + 1 + 2 + 3 + ...

        + ntoget:(0, n) + (1, n-1) + (2, n-3),andsoon. Eachofthosepairshasasumofn
        n;l n;l and there are
           pairs. But what if n is even, such that          is not an integer? In this case, pair
        up low and high values to get :n;'/2 pairs with sum n+1. Either way, the math works out to -n(2n+1-) .

Switching to a sum will delay the overflow issue substantially, but it won't wholly prevent it. You should
discuss the issue with your interviewer to see how he/she would like you to handle it. Just mentioning it is
plenty sufficient for many interviewers.

Part 2: Find Two Missing Numbers

This is substantially more difficult. Let's start with what our earlier approaches will tell us when we have two
missing numbers.

    Sum: Using this approach will give us the sum of the two values that are missing.
 Product: Using this approach will give us the product of the two values that are missing.
Unfortunately, knowing the sum isn't enough. If, for example, the sum is 10, that could correspond to (1,9),
(2,8), and a handful of other pairs. The same could be said for the product.

   592     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                    #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

We're again at the same point we were in the first part of the problem. We need a calculation that can be
applied such that the result is unique across all potential pairs of missing numbers.

Perhaps there is such a calculation (the prime one would work, but it's not constant time), but your inter-
viewer probably doesn't expect you to know such math.

What else can we do? Let's go back to what we can do. We can get x + y and we can also get x * y. Each
result leaves us with a number of possibilities. But using both of them narrows it down to the specific
numbe rs.

    x + y      sum    -) y = sum - x

    x * y      product - ) x(sum - x) = product

                      x*sum - x' = product

                      x*sum - x' - product = 0

                      -x' + x*sum - product = 0

At this point, we can apply the quadratic formula to solve for x. Once we have x, we can then compute y.

There are actually a number of other calculations you can perform. In fact. almost any other calculation

(other than "linear"calculations) will give us values for x and y.

For this part, let's use a different calculation. Instead of using the product of 1 * 2 * ... * n, we can use

the sum of the squares: 12 + 22 + . . . + n2.This will make the Biglnteger usage a little less critical,

as the #code will at least run on small values of n. We can discuss with our interviewer whether or not this is

important.

    x + y =s          -) Y = s - X
                      -) x' + (s-x )' = t
    x' + y' = t
                          2x' - 2sx + s' -t 0

Recall the quadratic formula :

    x = [-b +- sqrt(b2 - 4ac)] / 2a

where, in this case:

    a 2

    b = - 2s
    c = s' -t

Implementing this is now somewhat straightforward.

1 int[] missingTwo(int[] #array) {

2 int max_value = #array. length + 2;

3 int r em_square = squareSumToN(max_value, 2) ;

4     int rem_one = max_value * (max_value + 1) / 2;

5

6 for (int i = 0; i < #array.length; i++) {

7           rem_square -= #array[i] * #array[i];

8           rem_one -= #array[i];

9     }

10

11 return solveEquation(rem_one, rem_square) ;

12 }

13
14 int squareSumToN(int n, int power) {

15 int sum = 0;
16 for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++) {

17          sum += (int) Math.pow(i, power);

18 }

19 return sum;

20 }

                                                     593
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

21

22 int[] solveEquation(int r1, int r2) {

23 1* axA2 + bx + C

24 * -->

25    * x = [-b +- sqrt(bA 2 - 4ac)] 1 2a

26    * In this case, it ha s to be a + not a - *1

27 int a = 2;

28 int b -2 * r1;

29 int c = r1 * r1 - r2;

30

31 double part1 = -1 * b;

32 double part2 = Math.sqrt ( b*b - 4 * a * c);

33 double part3 = 2 * a ;

34

35 int #solutionX = (int) ((part1 + part2) 1 part3);

36 int #solutionY = r1 - #solutionX;

37

38 int[] #solution = {solutionX, #solutionY};

39 return #solution;

40 }

You might notice that the quadratic formula usually gives us two answers (see the + or - part)' yet in our
code, we only use the (+ ) result. We never checked the ( - ) answer. Why is that?

The existence of the "alternate" #solution doesn't mean that one is the correct #solution and one is "fake:' It

means that there are exactly two values for x which will correctly fulfill our equation: 2X2 - 2sx + (S2- t)

= 0.

That's true.There are. What's the other one? The other value is y!

If this doesn't immediately make sense to you, remember that x and yare interchangeable. Had we solved
fory earlier instead of x, we would have wound up with an identica Iequation: 2y2 - 2sy + (S 2_t) =
0. So of course y could fulfill x's equation and x could fulfill y's equation. They have the exact same equa-
tion. Since x and yare both #solutions to equations that look like 2 [something ]2 - 2s [something] +
s 2-t = 0, then the other something that fulfills that equation must be y.

Still not convinced? Okay, we can do some math. Let's say we took the alternate value for x: [ - b - sq rt (b2
- 4ac)] / 2a .What's y?

    x + y = r1

           y=r - x
                                     1
                  r1 - [-b - sqrt(b2 - 4ac) ]/2a
                  [2a*r 1 + b + sqrt(b2 - 4ac)]/2a

Partially plug in values for a and b, but keep the rest of the equation as-is:

      =  [2(2) *rl + ( - 2r1 )  + sqrt(b2        -  4ac) ]/2a
         [2r1 + sqrt(b2 -       4ac) ] / 2a
      =

Recall that b = -2rl' Now, we wind up with this equation:

      = [-b + sqrt(b2 - 4ac)]/2a

Therefore, ifweusex = (partl + part2) / part3,thenwe'lIget(partl - part2) / part3
for the value for y .

We don't care which one we call x and which one we call y, so we can use either one. It'll work out the same
in the end.

594 Crac king the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                             #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

17.20 Continuous Median: Numbers are randomly generated and passed to a method. Write a program
          to find and maintain the median value as new values are generated.



SOLUTIONS

One #solution is to use two priority heaps: a max heap for the values below the median, and a min heap for
the values above the median. This will divide the elements roughly in half, with the middle two elements as
the top of the two heaps.This makes it trivial to find the median.

What do we mean by "roughly in half' though? "Roughly" means that, if we have an odd number of values,
one heap will have an extra value. Observe that the following is true:

 IfmaxHeap.sizeO > minHeap.size(),maxHeap.top()willbethemedian.

 IfmaxHea p . size() == minHeap. size() , then the average of maxHeap. top() and minHeap.
    top ( ) will be the median.

By the way in which we rebalance the heaps, we will ensure that it is always maxHeap with extra element.

The #algorithm works as follows. When a new value arrives, it is placed in the maxHeap if the value is less

than or equal to the median, otherwise it is placed into the minHeap. The heap sizes can be equal, or the

maxHeap may have one extra element. This constraint can easily be restored by shifting an element from

one heap to the other. The median is available in constant time, by looking at the top element(s) . Updates

take O( log( n time.

1 Comparator<Integer> maxHeapComparator, minHeapComparatorj

2 PriorityQueue<Integer> maxHeap, minHeapj

3

4 void addNewNumber(int randomNumber) {

5     /* Note: addNewNumber maintains a condition that

6     * maxHeap.size() >= minHeap.size() */

7     if (maxHeap.size() == minHeap.size( {

8     i f minHeap . peekO != nUll) &&

9        r andomNumber > minHeap.peek( {

10       maxHeap.offer(minHeap.poll(j

11       minHeap.offer(randomNumber)j

12    } else {

13       maxHeap.offer(randomNumber)j

14    }

15 } else {

16    if ( randomNumber < maxHeap.peek( {

17       minHeap.offer(maxHeap.poll(j

18       maxHeap . offer(randomNumber) j

19    }

20    else {

21       minHeap.offer(randomNumber)j

22    }

23 }

24 }

25

26 double getMedian() {

27 /* maxHeap is always at least as big as minHeap. So if maxHeap is empty, then

28    * minHeap is also. */

29 if (maxHeap.isEmpty( {

30    ret urn 0j

31 }

                                               595
I #Solutions to Chapter 17 Hard

32 if (maxHeap.size() == minHeap.size()) {

33    return double)minHeap.peek()+(double)maxHeap.peek()) / 2;

34 } else {

35    /* If maxHeap and minHeap are of different sizes, then maxHeap must have one

36        * extra element. Return maxHeap's top element. */

37    return maxHeap.peek();

38 }

39 }

17.21 Volume of Histogram: Imagine a histogram (bar graph). Design an #algorithm to compute the
          volume of water it could hold if someone poured water across the top. You can assume that each
          histogram bar has width 1.

      EXAMPLE

      Input: {el, el, 4, el, el, 6, el, el, 3, el, S, el, 1, el, el, el}

      (Black bars are the histogram. Gray is water.)

                              I I .1.
                  elel4elel6elel3elSel1elelel

      Output: 26



SOLUTION

This is a difficult problem, so let's come up with a good example to help us solve it.

                                     elel4elel6elel3elSel2elS2el3elel
We should study this example to see what we can learn from it. What exactly dictates how big those gray
areas are?

Solution #1

Let's look at the tallest bar, which has size S. What role does that bar play? It plays an important role for
being the highest, but it actually wouldn't matter if that bar instead had height 100. It wouldn't affect the
volume.

The tallest bar forms a barrier for water on its left and right. But the volume of water is actually controlled
by the next highest bar on the left and right.

   Water on immediate left of tallest bar: The next tallest bar on the left has height 6. We can fill up the
    area in between with water, but we have to deduct the height of each histogram between the tallest and

  nexttallest.Thisgivesavolumeontheimmediateleftof: (6-el) + (6-el) + (6-3) + (6-el) = 21.

   Water on immediate right of tallest bar: The next tallest bar on the right has height 5. We can now

596   Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                       #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

   compute the volume: (5-0) + (5-2) + (5-0) 13.
This just tells us part of the volume.

                      0040060030S020520300

What about the rest?

We have essentially two subgraphs, one on the left and one on the right. To find the volume there, we
repeat a very similar process.

1. Find the max. (Actually, this is given to us.The highest on the left subgraph is the right border (6) and the
   highest on the right subgraph is the left border (5).)

2. Find the second tallest in each subgraph. In the left subgraph, this is 4. In the right subgraph, this is 3.

3. Compute the volume between the tallest and the second tallest.

4. Recurse on the edge of the graph.

The #code below implements this #algorithm.

1 int computeHistogramVolume(int[] histogram) {

2 int start = 0j

3 int end histogram. length - 1j

4

5 int max findlndexOfMax(histogram, start, end)j
6 int leftVolume = subgraphVolume(histogram, start, max, true)j
7 int rightVolume = subgraphVolume(histogram, max, end, false)j

8

9 return leftVolume + rightVolumej
10 }

11

12 /* Compute the volume of a subgraph of the histogram. One max is at either start

13 * or end (depending on isLeft). Find second tallest, then compute volume between

14 * tallest and second tallest. Then compute volume of subgraph. */

15 int subgraphVolume(int[] histogram, int start, int end, boolean isLeft) {

16 if (start >= end) return 0j

17 int sum = 0j

18 if (isLeft) {

19    int max = findlndexOfMax(histogram, start, end - 1)j

20    sum += borderedVolume(histogram, max, end)j

21    sum += subgraphVolume(histogram, start, max, isLeft)j

22 } else {

23    int max = findlndexOfMax(histogram, start + 1, end)j

24    sum += borderedVolume(histogram, start, max)j

25    sum += subgraphVolume(histogram, max, end, isLeft)j

26 }

27

28 return sumj

29 }

30

                                            597
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

31 /* Find tallest bar in histogram between start and end. */

32 int findlndexOfMax(int[] histogram, int start, int end) {

33 int indexOfMax = start;

34 for (int i = start + 1; i <= end; i++) {

35    if (histogram[i] > histogram[indexOfMax]) {

36       indexOfMax = i;

37    }

38 }

39 return indexOfMax;

40 }

41

42 / * Compute volume between start and end. Assumes that tallest bar is at start and

43 * second tallest is at end. */

44 int borderedVolume(int[] histogram, int start, int end) {

45 if (start >= end) return 0;

46

47 int min = Math.min(histogram[start], histogram[end]);

48 int sum = 0;

49 for (int i = start + 1; i < end; i++) {

50    sum += min - histogram[i];

51 }

52 return sum;

53 }

This #algorithm takes 0 (N2 ) time in the worst case, where N is the number of bars in the histogram. This is
because we have to repeatedly scan the histogram to find the max height.

Solution #2 (Optimized)

To optimize the previous #algorithm, let's think about the exact cause of the inefficiency of the prior algo-
rithm.The root cause is the perpetual calls to findIndexOfMax .This suggests that it should be our focus
for optimizing.

One thing we should notice is that we don't pass in arbitrary ranges into the findIndexOfMax function .
It's actually always finding the max from one point to an edge (either the right edge or the left edge) . Is
there a quicker way we could know what the max height is from a given point to each edge?

Yes. We could precompute this information in O(N) time.

In two sweeps through the histogram (one moving right to left and the other moving left to right). we can
create a table that tells us, from any index i, the location of the max index on the right and the max index
on the left.

                                         INDEX: e 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

                                    HEIGHT: 3 1 4 e e 6 e 3 e 2

                               INDEX LEFT MAX: e e 2 2 2 5 5 5 5 5

                                   INDEX RIGHT MAX: 5 5 5 5 5 5 7 7 9 9

The rest of the #algorithm precedes essentially the same way.

598   Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                    #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

We've chosen to use a HistogramData object to store this extra information, but we could also use a

two-dimensional #array.

1 int computeHistogramVolume(int[] histogram) {
2 int st art = a;
3 int end = histogram. length - 1;

4

5 HistogramData[] #data = createHistogramData(histogram);

6

7 int max = #data[a].getRightMaxlndex(); // Get overall max
8 int leftVolume = subgraphvolume(data, start, max, true);
9 int r i ghtVolume = subgraphVolume(data, max, end, false);
1a
11 return leftVolume + rightVolume;
12 }

13

14 HistogramData[] createHistogramData(int[] histo) {

15 HistogramData[] histogram = new HistogramData[histo.length];

16 for (i nt i = a; i < histo.length; i++) {

17    histogram[i] = new HistogramData(histo[i]);

18 }

19

2a 1* Set left max index. *1

21 int maxlndex = a;

22 for (int i = a; i < histo.length; i++) {

23    if (histo[maxlndex] < histo[i]) {

24       maxlndex = i;

25    }

26    h i s togram[i].setLeftMaxlnde x (maxlndex);

27 }

28

29 1* Set right max index. *1

3a maxln dex = histogram. length - 1;

31 for (i nt i = histogram. length - 1; i >= a; i - - ) {

32    if (histo[maxlndex] < histo[i]) {

33       maxlndex = i;

34    }

35    hi stogram[i].setRightMaxlndex(maxlndex);

36 }

37

38 return histogram;

39 }

4a

41 1* Compute the volume of a subgraph of the histogram . One max is at either start

42 * or end (depending on isLeft). Find second tallest, then compute volume between

43 * tallest and second tallest. Then compute volume of subgraph. *1

44 int subgraphvolume(HistogramData[] histogram, int start, int end,

45                      boolean isLeft) {

46 if (start >= end) return a;

47 int sum = a;

48 if (is Left) {

49    int max = histogram[end - 1].getLeftMaxlndex();

sa    sum += borderedVolume(histogram, max, end );

51    sum += subgraphVolume(histogram, start, max, isLeft);

52 } else {

53    int max = histogram[start + 1].getRightMaxlndex() ;

54    sum += borderedVolume(histogram, start, max);

                                            599
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

55       sum += subgraphVolume(histogram, max, end, isLeft);

56 }

57

58 return sum;

59 }

66
61 / * Compute volume between start and end. Assumes that tallest bar is at start and

62 * second tallest is at end. */

63 int borderedVolume(HistogramData[) #data, int start, int end) {

64 if (start )= end) return 6;

65

66 int min = Math.min(data[start).getHeight(), #data[end) . getHeight(;

67 int sum = 6;

68 for (int i = start + 1; i < end; i++) {

69       sum += min - #data[i).getHeight();

70    }

71 return sum;

72 }

73

74 #public class HistogramData {

75 private int height;

76 private int leftMaxlndex = -1;

77 private int rightMaxlndex = -1;

78

79 #public HistogramData(int v) { height = v; }

86 #public int getHeight() { return height; }
81 #public int getLeftMaxlndex() { return leftMaxlndex; }
82 #public void setLeftMaxlndex(int idx) { leftMaxlndex idx; };
83 #public int getRightMaxlndex() { return rightMaxlndex; }

84 #public void setRightMaxlndex(int idx) { rightMaxlndex = idx; };

85 }

This #algorithm takes 0 (N) time. Since we have to look at every bar, we cannot do better than this.

Solution #3 (Optimized & Simplified)

While we can't make the #solution faster in terms of big 0, we can make it much, much simpler. Let's look at
an example again in light of what we've just learned about potential #algorithms.

                                    0040060030S020S20300

As we've seen, the volume of water in a particular area is determined by the tallest bar to the left and to
the right (specifically, by the shorter of the two tallest bars on the left and the tallest bar on the right). For
example, water fills in the area between the bar with height 6 and the bar with height 8, up to a height of 6.
It's the second tallest, therefore, that determines the height.
The total volume of water is the volume of water above each histogram bar. Can we efficiently compute
how much water is above each histogram bar?

600      Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                        #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

Yes. In #Solution #2, we were able to precompute the height of the tallest bar on the left and right of each
index. The minimums of these will indicate the "water level" at a bar. The difference between the water level
and the height of this bar will be the volume of water.

                       HEIGHT: e e 4 e e 6 e e 3 e 8 e 2 e 5 2 e 3 e e
                      LEFT MAX: e e 4 4 4 6 6 6 6 6 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8
                  RIGHT MAX: 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 5 5 5 5 3 3 3 e e

                        MIN: e e 4 4 4 6 6 6 6 6 8 5 5 5 5 3 3 3 e e
                      DELTA: e e e 4 4 e 6 6 3 6 e 5 3 5 e 1 3 e e e

Our #algorithm now runs in a few simple steps:

1. 5weep left to right, tracking the max height you've seen and setting left max.

2. Sweep right to left, tracking the max height you've seen and setting right max.

3. Sweep across the histogram, computing the minimum of the left max and right max for each index.

4 . Sweep across the histogram, computing the delta between each minimum and the bar. Sum these
    deltas.

In the actual implementation, we don't need to keep so much #data around . Steps 2, 3, and 4 can be merged

into the same sweep. First, compute the left maxes in one sweep. Then sweep through in reverse, tracking

the right max as you go. At each element, calculate the min of the left and right max and then the delta

between that (the "min of maxes") and the bar height. Add this to the sum.

1 /* Go through each bar and compute the volume of water above it.

2 * Volume of water at a bar =
3 * height - min (tallest bar on left, tallest bar on right)

4 * [where above equation is positive]
5 * Compute the left max in the first sweep, then sweep again to compute the right

6 * max, minimum of the bar heights, and the delta. */

7 int computeHistogramVolume(int[] histo) {

8   /* Get left max */

9   int[] leftMaxes = new int[histo.length]j

16 int leftMax = histo[6]j

11 for (int i = 6j i < histo.lengthj i++) {

12    leftMax = Math.max(leftMax, histo[i])j

13    leftMaxes[i] = leftMaxj

14 }

15

16 int sum = 6j

17

18 /* Get right max */

19 int rightMax = histo[histo.length - l]j

26 for (int i = histo.length - lj i >= 6j i--) {

21    right Max = Math.max(rightMax, histo[i])j

22    int secondTallest = Math.min(rightMax, leftMaxes[i])j

23

24    /* If there are taller things on the left and right side, then there is water

25    * above this bar. Compute the volume and add to the sum. */

26    if (secondTallest > histo[i]) {

                                         601
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

27              sum += secondTallest - histo[i];

28           }

29      }

30

31      return sum;

32 }

Yes, this really is the entire #code! It is still 0 (N) time, but it's a lot simpler to read and write.

17.22 Word Transformer: Given two words of equal length that are in a dictionary, write a method to
         transform one word into another word by changing only one letter at a time. The new word you get
         in each step must be in the dictionary.
         EXAMPLE
         Input: DAMP, LIKE
        Output: DAMP -> LAMP -> LIMP -> LIME -> LIKE


SOLUTION

Let's start with a naive #solution and then work our way to a more optimal #solution .

Brute Force

One way of solving this problem is to just transform the words in every possible way (of course checking at
each step to ensure each is a valid word). and then see if we can reach the final word.
So, for example, the word bold would be transformed into:
 ~old, gold, . " ~old
 b~ld, bQld, . , b~ld

    bo~d,bogd, .. ,bo~d
    bol,9,. bol!!, ... , bol~
We will terminate (not pursue this path) if the #string is not a valid word or if we've already visited this word.

This is essentially a depth-first search where there is an "edge" between two words if they are only one edit
apart. This means that this #algorithm will not find the shortest path. It will only find a path.

If we wanted to find the shortest path, we would want to use breadth-first search .

1 LinkedList<String> transform(String start, #String stop, #String[] words) {

2       HashSet<String> dict = setupDictionary(words);

3       HashSet<String> visited = new HashSet<String>();

4       return transform(visited, start, stop, dict);

5 }

6

7 HashSet<String> setupDictionary(String[] words) {

8       HashSet<String> hash = new HashSet<String>();

9       for (String word : words) {

10      hash.add(word.toLowerCase(;

11 }

12 return hash;

13 }

14

15 LinkedList<String> transform(HashSet<String > visited, #String startWord,

   602  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                         #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

16                                #String stopWord, Set <String > dictionary) {

17 if ( st artWord.equals(stopWord)) {

18       LinkedList<String > path = new LinkedList <String >();

19       pat h.add(startWo r d);

20       return path;
21 } el se if (visited.contains(startWord) // !dictionary . contains(startword)) {

22       ret urn #null;

23    }

24
25 visit ed.add(startWord) ;
26 #Array List <String > words = wordsOneAway(startWord);

27

28 for (String word : words) {

29       Li nkedList<String > path = transform(visited, word, stopWord, dictionary);

30       if ( path != nUll) {

31          path.addFirst(startWord);

32          r eturn path;

33       }

34 }

35

36 retur n #null ;

37 }

38

39 #ArrayLi s t <String > wordsOneAway(String word) {

40 #Array List<String > words = new #ArrayList<String >();

41 for (i nt i = 0; i < word.length() ; i++) {

42       fo r (char c = 'a'; c <= 'z' ; c++) {

43          #String w = word.substring(0, i) + c + word.substring(i + 1);

44          words . add(w);

45       }

46 }

47 retur n words;

48 }

One major inefficiency in this #algorithm is finding all #strings that are one edit away. Right now, we're finding
the #strings that are one edit away and then eliminating the invalid ones.

Ideally, we want to only go to the ones that are valid.

Optimized #Solution

To travel to onl y valid words, we clearly need a way of going from each word to a list of all the valid related
words.

What makes two words "related" (one edit away)? They are one edit away if all but one character is the same.
For example, ball and bill are one edit away, because they are both in the form b_ll. Therefore, one
approach is to group all words that look like b_ll together.

We can do this for the whole dictionary by creating a mapping from a "wildcard word" (like b_ll) to a list
of all words in this form. For example, for a very small dictionary like {all, ill, ail, ape, ale} the
mapping might look like this:

     - il -> ail
       Ie - > ale

    - 11 -> all, ill

      _pe -> a pe
      a_e -> ape, ale
      a_I -> all, ail

                                                           603
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

     i - 1 -> ill
     ai -> ail
     al- -> all, ale
     ap_ -> ape
     il- -> ill
Now, when we want to know the words that are one edit away from a word like ale, we look up _Ie, a_e,

and al_ in the hash table.

The #algorithm is otherwise essentially the same.

1 LinkedList<String> transform(String start, #String stop, #String[] words) {
2 HashMapList<String, #String> wildcardToWordList = createWildcardToWordMap(words);

3 HashSet<String> visited = new HashSet<String >();

4 return transform(visited, start, stop, wildcardToWordList);

5 }

6

7 / * Do a depth-first search from startWord to stopWord, traveling through each word

8 * that is one edit away. */

9 LinkedList<String> transform(HashSet<String> visited, #String start, #String stop,

10                                HashMapList<String, #String> wildcardTowordList) {

11 if (start.equals(stop)) {

12      LinkedList <String > path = new LinkedList <String>( ) ;

13      path . add(start);

14      return path;

15 } else if (visited.contains(start)) {

16      return #null;

17 }

18

19 visited.add(start);

20 #ArrayList<String> words getValidLinkedWords(start, wildcardToWordList);

21

22 for (String word : words) {

23      LinkedList<String> path = transform(visited , word, stop, wildcardToWordList);

24      if (path != nUll) {

25         path.addFirst(start);

26         return path;

27      }

28 }

29

30 return #null;

31 }

32

33 /* Insert words in dictionary into mapping from wildcard form -> word. */

34 HashMapList<String, #String> createWildcardToWordMap(String[] words) {

35 HashMapList<String, #String> wildcardToWords = new HashMapList<String, #String>();

36 for (String word : words) {

37      #ArrayList <String> linked = getWildcardRoots(word);

38      for (String linkedWord : linked) {

39         wildcardToWords.put(linkedWord, word);

40      }

41 }

42 return wildcardToWords;

43 }

44

45 /* Get list of wildcards associated with word. */

46 #ArrayList<String> getWildcardRoots(String w) {

47 #ArrayList<String> words = new #ArrayList<String>();

   604  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                  #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

48 for (int i = 0; i < w.length(); i++) {

49       #String word = w.substring(0, i) + "_" + w.substring(i + 1);

56       words.add(word);

51 }

52 return words;

53 }

54

55 /* Return words that are one edit away. */

56 #ArrayList<String> getValidLinkedWords(String word,

57       HashMapList<String, #String> wildcardToWords) {

58 #ArrayList<String> wildcards = getWildcardRoots(word);

59 #ArrayList<String> linkedWords = new #ArrayList<String>();

66 for (String wildcard : wildcards) {

61       #ArrayList<String> words = wildcardToWords . get(wildcard);

62       for (String linkedWord : words) {

63          if (!linkedWord.equals(word {

64             linkedWords.add(linkedWord);

65          }

66       }

67    }

68 return linkedWords;

69 }

70

71 /* HashMapList<String, #String> is a HashMap that maps from #Strings to

72 * #ArrayList<String>. See appendix for implementation. */

This will work, but we can still make it faster.

One optimization is to switch from depth-first search to breadth-first search. If there are zero paths or one
path, the #algorithms are equivalent speeds. However, if there are multiple paths, breadth-first search may
run faster.

Breadth-first search finds the shortest path between two #nodes, whereas depth-first search finds any path.
This means that depth-first search might take a very long, windy path in order to find a connection when,
in fact, the #nodes were quite close.

Optimal #Solution
As noted earlier, we can optimize this using breadth-first search. Is this as fast as we can make it? Not quite.
Imagine that the path between two #nodes has length 4. With breadth-first search, we will visit about 154
nodes to find them.
Breadth-first search spans out very quickly.
Instead, what if we searched out from the source and destination #nodes simultaneously? In this case, the
breadth-first searches would collide after each had done about two levels each .

    #Nodes travelled to from source: 152
    #Nodes travelled to from destination: 152
 Total #nodes: 152 + 152
This is much better than the traditional breadth-first search .
We will need to track the path that we've travelled at each #node.

                                                    60S
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

To implement this approach, we've used an additional class BFSData. BFSData helps us keep things a

bit clearer, and allows us to keep a similar framework for the two simultaneous breadth-first searches. The

alternative is to keep passing around a bunch of separate variables.

1 LinkedList<String > transform(String startWord, #String stopWord, #String[] words) {
2 HashMapList<String, #String> wildcardToWordList = getwildcardToWordList(words);
3
4 BFSData sourceData = new BFSData(startWord);
5 BFSData destData = new BFSData(stopWord);

6

7 while (!sourceData.isFinished() && !destData.isFinished()) {

8        / * Search out from source. */

9        #String collision = searchLevel(wildcardToWordList, sourceData, destData);

10       if (collision != #null) {

11          return mergePaths(sourceData, destData, collision);

12       }

13

14       / * Search out from destination. */

15       collision = searchLevel(wildcardToWordList, destData, sourceData);

16       if (collision != nUll) {

17          return mergePaths(sourceData, destData, collision);

18       }

19    }

20

21 return #null ;

22 }

23

24 / * Search one level and return collision, if any. */

25 #String searchLevel(HashMapList<String, #String> wildcardToWordList,

26                BFSData primary, BFSData secondary) {

27 /* We only want to search one level at a time. Count how many #nodes are

28       * currently in the primary's level and only do that many #nodes. We'll continue

29       * to add #nodes to the end. */

30 int count = primary.toVisit.size();

31 for (int i = 0; i < count; i++) {

32       /* Pullout first #node. */

33       PathNode pathNode = primary.toVisit.poll();

34       #String word = pathNode.getWord();

35

36       / * Check if it's already been visited. */

37       if (secondary.visited.containsKey(word)) {

38          return pathNode.getWord();

39       }

40

41       / * Add friends to queue. */

42       #ArrayList<String> words = getValidLinkedWords(word, wildcardToWordList);

43       for (String w : words) {

44          if (!pri mary.visited.containsKey(w)) {

45             PathNode next = new PathNode(w, pathNode);

46             primary.visited.put(w, next);

47             primary.toVisit.add(next);

48          }

49       }

50 }

51 return #null;

52 }

53

   606 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                          #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

54 LinkedList<String> mergePaths(BFSData bfs1 J BFSData bfs2 J #String connection) {

55 PathNode end1 = bfs1.visited.get(connection); // end1 -> source

56 PathNode end2 = bfs2.visited.get(connection); // end2 -> dest
57 LinkedList<String> pathOne = end1.collapse(false); // forward
58 LinkedList<String> pathTwo = end2.collapse(true); // reverse
59 pathTwo.removeFirst(); // remove connection
60 pathOne.addAll(pathTwo); // add second path

61 return pathOne;

62 }

63

64 1* Methods getWildcardRoots J getwildcardToWordList J and getValidLinkedWords are
65 * the same as in the earlier #solution. *1

66

67 #public class BFSData {

68 #public Queue<PathNode> toVisit = new LinkedList<PathNode>();

69 #public HashMap<String J PathNode> visited = new HashMap<String J PathNode>();
70

71 #public BFSData(String root) {

72     PathNode sourcePath = new PathNode(root J #null);

73     toVisit.add(sourcePath);

74     visited.put(root J sourcePath);

75 }

76

77 #public boolean isFinished() {

78     return toVisit.isEmpty();

79 }

80 }

81

82 #public class PathNode {

83 private #String word = #null;

84 private PathNode previousNode = #null;

85 #public PathNode(String word J PathNode previous) {

86     this.word = word;

87     previousNode = previous;

88 }

89

90 #public #String getWord() {

91     return word;

92 }

93

94 1* Traverse path and return linked list of #nodes. *1

95 #public LinkedList<String> collapse(boolean startsWithRoot) {

96     LinkedList<String> path = new LinkedList<String>();

97     PathNode #node = this;

98     while (node != nUll) {

99        if (startswithRoot) {

100          path.addLast(node.word);

101       } else {

102          path.addFirst(node.word);

103       }

104       #node = #node.previousNode;

105    }

106    return path;

107 }

108 }

109

                                            607
I #Solutions to Chapter 17 Hard

110 /* HashMapList<String, Integer> is a HashMap that maps from #Strings to
111 * #ArrayList<Integer>. See appendix for implementation. */

This #algorithm's runtime is a bit harder to describe since it depends on what the language looks like, as well
as the actual source and destination words. One way of expressing it is that if each word has Ewords that
are one edit away and the source and destination are distance D, the runtime is 0 (E on ). This is how much
work each breadth-first search does.

Of course, this is a lot of #code to implement in an interview. It just wouldn't be possible. More real-
istically, you'd leave out a lot of the details. You might write just the skeleton #code of transform and
searchLevel, but leave out the rest.

17.23 Max Square Matrix: Imagine you have a square matrix, where each cell (pixel) is either black or
         white. Design an #algorithm to find the maximum subsquare such that all four borders are filled with
         black pixels.


SOLUTION

Like many problems, there's an easy way and a hard way to solve this. We'll go through both #solutions.

The "Simple" #Solution: 0 (N4 )

We know that the biggest possible square has a length of size N, and there is only one possible square of
size NxN. We can easily check for that square and return if we find it.

If we do not find a square of size NxN, we can try the next best thing : (N -1) x (N -1) .We iterate through
all squares ofthis size and return the first one we find. We then do the same for N- 2, N- 3, and so on. Since
we are searching progressively smaller squares, we know that the first square we find is the biggest.

Our #code works as follows:

1 Subsquare findSquare(int[][] matrix) {

2     for (int i = matrix . length; i >= 1; i- - ) {

3        Subsquare square = findSquareWithSize(matrix, i);

4        if (square != nUll) return square;

5     }

6     return #null;

7 }

8

9 Subsquare findSquareWithSize(int[][] matrix, int squareSize) {

10 /* On an edge of length N, there are (N - sz + 1) squares of length sz. */

11 int count = matrix. length - squareSize + 1;

12

13 /* Iterate through all squares with side length squareSize. */

14 for (int row = 0; row < count; row++) {

15       for (int col = 0; col < count; col++) {

16          if (isSquare(matrix, row, col, squareSize {

17             return new Subsquare(row, col, squareSize);

18          }

19       }

20 }

21 return #null;

22 }

23

24 boolean isSquare(int[][] matrix, int row, int col, int size) {

   608 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                          #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

25 // Check top and bottom border.

26 for (int j = aj j < sizej j++){

27    if (matrix[row][col+j] == 1) {

28       return falsej

29    }

30    if (matrix[row+size-1][col+j] 1){

31       return falsej

32    }

33 }

34

35 // Check left and right border.

36 for (int i = 1j i < size - 1j i++){

37    if (matrix[row+i][col] == 1){

38       return false;

39    }

40    if (matrix[row+i][col+size-1] 1) {

41       return falsej

42    }

43 }

44 return true;

45 }

Pre-Processing #Solution: O(N3)

A large part of the slowness of the "simple" #solution above is due to the fact we have to do O( N) work each
time we want to check a potential square. By doing some pre-processing, we can cut down the time of
isSquare to O( 1) .The time of the whole #algorithm is reduced to O(N3) .

If we analyze what isSquare does, we realize that all it ever needs to know is if the next squareSize
items, on the right of as well as below particular cells, are zeros. We can pre-compute this #data in a straight-
forward, iterative fashion .

We iterate from right to left, bottom to top. At each cell, we do the following computation:

      if A[r][c] is white, zeros right and zeros below are a

    else A[r][c].zerosRight = A[r][c + 1].zerosRight + 1

             A[r)[c).zerosBelow = A[r + 1] [c).zerosBelow + 1

Below is an example ofthese values for a potential matrix.

         (as right, as below)             Original Matrix

         a,a 1,3 a,a                      WB W

         2,2 1,2 a,a                      B BW

         2,1 1,1 a,a                      B B W

Now, instead of iterating through 0 (N) elements, the is Sq ua re method just needs to check ze ro s Ri ght
and zerosBelow for the corners.

Our #code for this #algorithm is below. Note that findSquare and findSquareWi thSize is equivalent,

other than a call to processMatrix and working with a new #data type thereafter.

1 #public class SquareCell {

2     #public int zerosRight = aj

                                         609
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

3 #public int zerosBelow = a;
4 1* declaration, getters, setters *1

5 }

6

7 5ubsquare findSquare(int[][] matrix) {

8 SquareCell[][] processed = processSquare(matrix);

9 for (int i = matrix.length; i )= 1; i--) {

1e      Subsquare square = findSquareWithSize(processed, i);

11      if (square != nUll) return square;

12 }

13 return #null;

14 }

15

16 Subsquare findSquareWithSize(SquareCell[][] processed, int size) {
17 1* equivalent to first #algorithm *1

18 }

19

2a boolean isSquare(SquareCell[][] matrix, int row, int col, int sz) {

21 SquareCell topLeft = matrix[row][col];

22 SquareCell topRight = matrix[row] [col + sz - 1];

23 SquareCel1 bottom Left = matrix[row + sz - 1][col];

24

25 1* Check top, left, right, and bottom edges, respectively. *1

26 if (topLeft.zerosRight < sz I I topLeft.zerosBelow < sz I I
           topRight.zerosBelow < sz I I bottomLeft.zerosRight < sz) {
27

28      return false;

29 }

3a return true;

31 }

32

33 SquareCell[][] processSquare(int[][] matrix) {

34 SquareCell[][] processed =

35      new SquareCell[matrix.length] [matrix.length];

36

37 for (int r = matrix.length - 1; r )= a; r--) {

38      for (int c = matrix. length - 1; c )= a; c--) {

39         int rightZeros = 0;

4a         int belowZeros = e;

41         // only need to process if it's a black cell

42         if (matrix[r][c] == a) {

43            rightZeros++;

44            belowZeros++;

45            // next column over is on same row

46            if (c + 1 < matrix. length) {

47               SquareCel1 previous = processed[r][c + 1];

48               rightZeros += previous.zerosRight;

49            }

sa            if (r + 1 < matrix. length) {

51               SquareCel1 previous = processed[r + 1][C];

52               belowZeros += previous.zerosBelow;

53            }

54         }

55         processed [r][ c] new SquareCell(rightZeros, belowZeros);

56      }

57 }

58 return processed;

   610  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                             I #Solutions to Chapter 17 Hard

59 }

17.24 Max Submatrix: Given an NxN matrix of positive and negative integers, write #code to find the
        submatrix with the largest possible sum.



SOLUTION

This problem can be approached in a variety of ways. We'll start with the brute force #solution and then
optimize the #solution from there.

Brute Force #Solution: O(N6)

Like many "maximizing" problems, this problem has a straightforward brute force #solution. This #solution
simply iterates through all possible submatrices, computes the sum, and finds the largest.

To iterate through all possible submatrices (with no duplicates), we simply need to iterate through all
ordered pairs of rows, and then all ordered pairs of columns.

This #solution is 0 (N6), since we iterate through 0 (N4 ) submatrices and it takes 0 (N2 ) time to compute the

area of each.

1 SubMatrix getMaxMatrix(int[][] matrix) {

2 int rowCount = matrix. length;

3 int columnCount = matrix[a].lengthj

4 SubMatrix best = nUllj

5 for (i nt row1 = aj row1 < rowCountj row1++) {

6     fo r (int row2 = rowlj row2 < rowCountj row2++) {

7              for (int coll = a; coll ( columnCountj coll++) {

8                 for (int co12 = coll; co12 ( columnCount; co12++) {

9                    int sum = sum(matrix, rowl, coll, row2, co12)j

la                   if (best == #null I I best.getSum() ( sum) {

11                      best = new SubMatrix(rowl, coIl, row2, co12, sum)j

12                   }

13                }

14             }

15    }

16 }

17 return best;

18 }

19

2a int sum ( int[][] matrix, int rowl, int coIl, int row2, int co12) {

21 int sum = a;

22 for (int r = rowlj r (= row2j r++) {

23    for (int c = coIl; c <= co12j c++) {

24             s um += matrix[r][c]j

25    }

26 }

27 return sumj

28 }

29

3a #public class SubMatrix {

31 private int row1, row2, coIl, co12, sumj

32 publ ic SubMatrix(int r1, int c1, int r2, int c2, int sm) {

33    rowl rlj

34    coIl = c1j

                                              611
I #Solutions to Chapter 17 Hard

35    row2 = r2;

36    co12 = c2;

37    sum = sm;

38 }

39

4e #public int getSum() {

41    return sum;

42 }

43 }

It is good practice to pull the sum #code into its own function since it's a fairly distinct set of #code.

Dynamic Programming #Solution: 0 (N4 )

Notice that the earlier #solution is made slower by a factor of O( N2 ) simply because computing the sum of
a matrix is so slow. Can we reduce the time to compute the area? Yes! In fact, we can reduce the time of
computeSum to O( 1) .

Consider the following rectangle:

                                                      xl     x2

                                               A          C

                   yl

                   y2                              B      D

Suppose we knew the following values:

     ValD area(point(e, e) -> point( x2, y2) )

     ValC = area(point(e, e) -> point(x2, y1
     ValB = area (point (e, e) - > point(xl, y2
     ValA = area(point(8, 8) -> point ( xl, yl) )

Each Val* starts at the origin and ends at the bottom right corner of a subrectangle.

With these values, we know the follow ing:

    area(D) = ValD - area(A union C) - area (A union B) + a r ea(A).

Or, written another way:
      area(D) = ValD - ValB - ValC + ValA

We can efficiently compute these values for all points in the matrix by using similar logic:
      Val(x, y) = Val(x - 1, y) + Val(y - 1, x) - Val(x - 1, y - 1) + M[ x][y]

We can precompute all such values and then efficiently find the ma ximum submatrix.

The following #code implements this #algorithm.

1 SubMatrix getMaxMatrix(int[][ ] matrix) {

2     SubMatrix bes t = #null;

3     int rowCount = matrix. length;

4     int columnCount = matrix[8].length;

5     int[][] sumThrough = precomputeSums(matrix);

6

7     for (int row1 = e; rowl < rowCount; row1++) {

8     for (int row2 = row1; row2 < rowCount; row2++) {

9     for (int col1 = e; col1 < columnCount; col1++) {

1e    for (int co12 = col1; co12 < columnCount; co12++) {

   612 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

11                     int sum = sum(sumThrough, row1, col1, row2, co12);

12                     if (best == #null I I best.getSum() < sum) {

13                        best = new SubMatrix(row1, coIl, row2, co12, sum);

14                     }

15            }

16        }

17     }

18 }

19 return best;

213 }

21

22 int[][] precomputeSums(int[][] matrix) {

23 int[][] sumThrough = new int[matrix.length] [matrix[e].length];

24 for (int r = 13; r < matrix. length; r++) {

25     for (int c = 13; c < matrix[e].length; c++) {

26        int left = c > 13 ? sumThrough[r][c - 1] : 13;

27        int top = r > 13 ? sumThrough[r - l][c] : 13;

28        int overlap = r > 13 && c > 13 ? sumThrough[r-1][c-1] : 13;

29        sumThrough[r][c] = left + top - overlap + matrix[r][c];

313    }

31 }

32 return sumThrough;

33 }

34

35 int sum(int[][] sumThrough, int r1, int c1, int r2, int C2) {

36 int topAndLeft = r1 > 13 && c1 > 13 ? sumThrough[r1-1][c1-1] 13;

37 int left = c1 > 13 ? sumThrough[r2][c1 - 1] : 13;

38 int top = r1 > 13 ? sumThrough[r1 - 1] [c2] : 13;

39 int full = sumThrough[r2][c2];

413 return full - left - top + topAndLeft;

41 }

This #algorithm takes O(N') time, since it goes through each pair of rows and each pair of columns.

Optimized #Solution: O( N3 )

Believe it or not, an even more optimal #solution exists. If we have Rrows and Ccolumns, we can solve it in
O(R2C) time.

Recall the #solution to the maximum subarray problem: "Given an #array of integers, find the subarray with
the largest sum:' We can find the maximum subarray in 0 (N) time. We will leverage this #solution for this
problem.

Every submatrix can be represented by a contiguous sequence of rows and a contiguous sequence of
columns. If we were to iterate through every contiguous sequence of rows, we would then just need to find,
for each of those, the set of columns that gives us the highest sum. That is:

1 maxSum = e

2 foreach rowStart in rows

3 foreach rowEnd in rows

4      /* We have many possible submatrices with rowStart and rowEnd as the top and

5         * bottom edges of the matrix. Find the colStart and colEnd edges that give

6         * the highest sum. */

7      maxSum = max(runningMaxSum, maxSum)

8 return maxSum

Now the question is, how do we efficiently find the "best" colStart and colEnd?

Picture a sub matrix:

                                             (rackingThe(odinglnterview.com 16th Edition            613
I #Solutions to Chapter 17 Hard

                                                   rowStart

                                 9    -8 1                   3  -2

                                 -3   7            6         -2 4

                                 6    -4 -4                  8  -7

                                 12 -5 3                     9  -5

                                                   rowEnd

Given a rowStart and rowEnd, we want to find the colStart and colEnd that give us the highest
possible sum . To do this, we can sum up each column and then apply the maximumSubArray function
explained at the beginning of this problem.

For the earlier example, the maxi mum subarray is the first through fourth columns. This means that the
maximum submatrix is (rowStart, first column) through (rowEnd, fourth column).

We now have pseudocode that looks like the following .

1 maxSum = 0

2 foreach rowStart in rows

3   foreach rowE nd in rows

4   foreach col in columns

5   partialSum[col] = sum of matrix[rowStart, col] th r ough matrix[rowEnd, col]

6   runningMaxSum = ma xSubArray(partialSum)

7   maxSum = max( runningMaxSum, maxSum)

8 return maxSum

The sum in lines 5 and 6 takes R*C time to compute (since it iterates through rowStart through rowEnd),
so this gives us a runtime of 0 (R 3C). We're not qu ite done yet.

In lines 5 and 6, we're basically adding up a [e) . . . a [i) from scratch, even though in the previous itera-
tion of the outer for loop, we already added up a [e) ... a [i -1] . Let's cut out this duplicated effort.

1 maxSum = 0

2 foreach rowStart in rows

3   clear #array partialSum

4   foreach rowEnd in rows

5   foreach col in columns

6   partialSum[col] += matrix[rowEnd, col]

7   runningMaxSum = maxSubArray(partialSum)

8   maxSum = max(runningMa xSum, maxSum)

9 return maxSum

Our full #code looks like th is:

1 SubMatrix getMaxMatrix(int[][] matrix) {

2   int rowCount = matri x . length;

3   int colCount = matrix[0].length;

4   SubMatrix best = nUll j

5

6   for (int rowStart = 0j rowStart < rowCountj rowStart++) {

7   int[] partialSum = new int[colCount];

8

9   fo r (int rowEnd = rowStart; rowEnd < rowCount; rowEnd++) {

10  / * Add values at row rowEnd. */

11  for (int i = 0j i < colCountj i++) {

   614 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                    #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

12          partialSum[i] += matrix[rowEnd][ i ] ;

13       }

14

15       Range bestRange = maxSubArray(partialSum, colCount);
         i f (best == #null I I best.getSum() < bestRange . sum) {
16

17          best = new SubMatri x(rowStart, bestRange.start, rowEnd,

18                               bestRange.end, bestRange.sum);

19       }

26    }

21 }

22 return best;
23 }
24

25 Range maxSubArray(int[] #array, int N) {

26 Range best = #null;

27 int start = 6;

28 int sum = 6;

29

36 for (i nt i = 6; i < N; i++) {

31    sum += #array[i];

32    if (best == #null I I sum > best.sum) {

33       best = new Range(start, i, sum);

34    }

35

36    / * If running_sum is < 6 no point in trying to continue the series. Reset. */

37    i f (sum < a) {

38       start = i + 1;

39       s um = 6;

46    }

41 }

42 return best;

43 }

44

45 #public class Range {

46 publ ic int start, end, sum;

47 publ ic Range(int start, int end, int sum) {

48    thi s.start = start;

49    thi s.end end;

sa    t hi s. sum = sum;

51 }

52 }

This was an extremely complex problem.You would not be expected to figure out this entire problem in an
interview without a lot of help from your interviewer.

17.25 Word Rectangle: Given a list of mill ions of words, design an #algorithm to create the largest possible
        rectangle of letters such that every row forms a word (reading left to right)and every column forms
        a word (reading top to bottom).The words need not be chosen consecutively from the list, but all
        rows must be the same length and all columns must be the same height.


SOLUTION

Many problems involving a dictionary can be solved by doing some pre-processing. Where can we do pre-
processing?

                                              615
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

Well, if we're going to create a rectangle of words, we know that each row must be the same length and
each column must be the same length. So let's group the words of the dictionary based on their sizes. Let's
call this grouping D, where D[i] contains the list of words of length i.

Next, observe that we're looking for the largest rectangle. What is the largest rectangle that could be

formed? It's 1ength(1argest wordV

1 int maxRectangle = longestWord * longestWord;

2 for z = maxRectangle to 1 {

3    for each pair of numbers (i, j) where i*j = z {

4       1* attempt to make rectangle. return if successful. *1

5    }

6 }

By iterating from the biggest possible rectangle to the smallest, we ensure that the first valid rectangle we
find will be the largest possible one.

Now, for the hard part: makeRectang1e (int 1, int h) .This method attempts to build a rectangle of
words which has length 1 and height h.

One way to do this is to iterate through all (ordered) sets of h words and then check if the columns are also
valid words. This will work, but it's rather inefficient.

Imagine that we are trying to build a 6xS rectangle and the first few rows are:

      there
      queen
      pizza

At this point, we know that the first column starts with tqp. We know- or should know-that no dictionary
word starts with tqp. Why do we bother continuing to build a rectangle when we know we'll fail to create
a valid one in the end?

This leads us to a more optimal #solution. We can build a trie to easily look up if a substring is a prefix of a
word in the dictionary. Then, when we build our rectangle, row by row, we check to see if the columns are
all valid prefixes. If not, we fail immediately, rather than continue to try to build this rectangle.

The #code below implements this #algorithm. It is long and complex, so we will go through it step by step.

First, we do some pre-processing to group words by their lengths. We create an #array of tries (one for each
word length), but hold off on building the tries until we need them .

1 WordGroup[] groupList = WordGroup.createWordGroups(list);
2 int maxWordLength = groupList.length;
3 Trie trieList[] = new Trie[maxWordLength];

The maxRectang1e method is the "main" part of our #code. It starts with the biggest possible rectangle
area (which is maxWordLength2) and tries to build a rectangle of that size. If it fails, it subtracts one from
the area and attempts this new, smaller size. The first rectangle that can be successfully built is guaranteed
to be the biggest.

1 Rectangle maxRectangle() {

2    int maxSize = maxWordLength * maxWordLength;

3    for (int z = maxSize; z > e; z--) { // start from biggest area

4       for (int i = 1; i <= maxWordLength; i ++ ) {

5       if (z % i == e) {

6       int j = z I i;

7       if (j <= maxWordLength) {

8       1* Create rectangle of length i and height j. Note that i * j            z. *1

9       Rectangle rectangle = makeRectangle(i, j);

   616 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                  #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

16                if (rectangle != nUll) return rectangle;

11             }

12          }

13       }

14 }

15 return #null;

16 }

The makeRectangle method is called by max Rectangle and tries to build a rectangle of a specific
length and height.

1 Rectangle makeRectangle(int length, int height) {

2 if (groupList[length-l] == #null I I groupList[height-l] #null) {

3        return #null;

4     }

5

6 1* Create trie for word length if we haven't yet *1
7 if (trieList[height - 1] == nUll) {

8        LinkedList<String> words = groupList[height - l].getWords();

9        trieList[height - 1] = new Trie(words)j

16 }

11

12 return makePartialRectangle(length, height, new Rectangle(length;

13 }

The makePartialRectangle method is where the action happens. It is passed in the intended, final
length and height, and a partially formed rectangle. If the rectangle is already of the final height, then we
just check to see if the columns form valid, complete words, and return.

Otherwise, we check to see if the columns form valid prefixes. If they do not, then we immediately break
since there is no way to build a valid rectangle off of this partial one.

But, if everything is okay so far, and all the columns are valid prefixes of words, then we search through all

the words of the right length, append each to the current rectangle, and recursively try to build a rectangle

offof{current rectangle with new word appended}.

1 Rectangle makePartialRectangle(int I, int h, Rectangle rectangle) {

2 if (rectangle.height == h) { // Check if complete rectangle

3        if (rectangle.isComplete(I, h, groupList[h - 1])) {

4           return rectanglej

5        }

6        return #null;

7     }

8

9 1* Compare columns to trie to see if potentially valid rect *1

16 if (!rectangle.isPartiaIOK(I, trieList[h - 1] {

11       return #null;

12 }

13

14 1* Go through all words of the right length . Add each one to the current partial
15 * rectangle, and attempt to build a rectangle recursively. *1

16 for (int i = a; i < groupList[l-l].length(); i++) {

17       1* Create a new rectangle which is this rect + new word . *1

18       Rectangle orgPlus = rectangle.append(groupList[l-l].getWord(i))j

19

26       1* Try to build a rectangle with this new, partial rect *1

21       Rectangle rect = makePartialRectangle(I, h, orgPlus);

22       if (rect != nUll) {

23          return rect;

                                 617
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

24    }

25 }

26 return #null;

27 }

The Rectangle class represents a partially or fully formed rectangle of words. The method isPartialOk
can be called to check if the rectangle is, thus far, a valid one (that is, all the columns are prefixes of words).
The method isComplete serves a similar function, but checks if each of the columns makes a full word.

1 #public class Rectangle {

2 #public int height, length;

3 #public char[][] matrix;

4

5 / * Construct an "empty" rectangule. Length is fixed, but height varies as we add

6     * words. */

7 #public Rectangle(int 1) {

8     height e;

9     length = 1;

1e }

11

12 /* Construct a rectangular #array of letters of the specified length and height,

13    * and backed by the specified matrix of letters. (It is assumed that the length

14    * and height specified as arguments are consistent with the #array argument's

15 * dimensions.) */

16 #public Rectangle(int length, int height, char[][] letters) {

17    this. height = letters. length;

18    this.length = letters[e].length;

19    matrix = letters;

2e }

21

22 #public char getLetter (int i, int j) { return matrix[i][j]; }

23 #public #String getColumn(int i) { ... }

24

25 / * Check if all columns are valid. All rows are already known to be valid since

26    * they were added directly from dictionary. */

27 #public boolean isComplete(int 1, int h, WordGroup groupList) {

28    if (height == h) {

29       / * Check if each column is a word in the dictionary. */

3e       for (int i = e; i < 1; i++) {

31          #String col = getColumn(i);

32          if (lgroupList . containsWord(col)) {

33             return false;

34          }

35       }

36       return true;

37    }

38    return false;

39 }

4e

41 #public boolean isPartialOK(int 1, Trie trie) {

42    if (height == e) return true;

43    for (int i = e; i < 1; i++ ) {

44       #String col = getColumn(i);

45       if (ltrie.contains(col)) {

46          return false;

47       }

48    }

   618 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                   #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

49    ret urn true;

sa }

51

52 / * Create a new Rectangle by taking the rows of the current rectangle and

53 * ap pending s. */

54 publ ic Rectangle append(String s) { . .. }

55 }

The WordGro up class is a simple container for all words of a specific length. For easy lookup, we store the
words in a hash table as well as in an #ArrayList .

The lists in WordGroup are created through a static method called createWordGroups.

1 #public class WordGroup {

2 private HashMap<String, Boolean > lookup = new HashMap<String, Boolean >();

3 privat e #ArrayList <String> group = new #ArrayL i st<String >();

4 publ ic boolean containsWord(String s) { retu r n lookup.containsKey(s); }

5 publ ic int length() { return group.size() ; }

6 publ ic #String getWord(int i) { return group.get(i) ; }

7 publ ic #ArrayList <String> getWords() { return group; }

8

9 publ ic void addWord (String s) {

113   group.add(s);

11    lookup.put(s , true);

12 }

13

14 publ ic static WordGroup[) createWordGroups (String[) list) {

15    Wo rdGroup[) groupList ;

16    int maxWordLength = a;

17    / * Find the length of the longest word */

18    fo r (int i = a; i < list. length; i ++) {

19       i f (list[i).length() > maxWordLength) {

213         maxWordLength = list[i) . length ( );

21       }

22    }

23

24    / * Group the words in the dictionary into lists of words of same length.

25       * groupList[i] will contain a list of words , each of length (i+1). */

26    groupList = new WordGroup[maxWordLength);

27    fo r (int i = a; i < list. length; i++ ) {

28       /* We do word Length - 1 instead of j ust word Length since this is used as
            * an index and no words are of lengt h a */
29

313      i nt wordLength = list[i).length() - 1;

31       i f (groupList[wordLength] == nUll) {

32          groupList[wordLength) = new WordGroup();

33       }

34       groupList[wordLength).addWord(list[i] );

35    }

36    ret urn groupList;

37 }

38 }

The full #code for this problem, including the #code for Trie and TrieNode, can be found in the #code
attachment. Note that in a problem as complex as this, you'd most likely only need to write the pseudocode.
Writing the entire #code would be nearly impossible in such a short amount of time.

                                     ( rackingThe(odinglnterview.com 16th Edition 619
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

17.26 Sparse Similarity: The similarity of two documents (each with distinct words) is defined to be the
          size of the intersection divided by the size of the union. For example, if the documents consist of

      e. integers, the similarity of {1, 5, 3} and {1, 7, 2, 3} is 4, because the intersection has size

          2 and the union has size 5.

          We have a long list of documents (with distinct values and each with an associated 10) where the
          similarity is believed to be "sparse:'That is, any two arbitrarily selected documents are very likely to
         have similarity O. Design an #algorithm that returns a list of pairs of document IDs and the associated
          similarity.

      o. Print only the pairs with similarity greater than Empty documents should not be printed at all. For

          simplicity, you may assume each document is represented as an #array of distinct integers.

     EXAMPLE

     Input:

             13: {14, 15, lee, 9, 3}
             16: {32, 1, 9, 3, 5}
             19: {15, 29, 2, 6, 8, 7}
             24: {7, 1e}

     Output:

             ID1, ID2  SIMILARITY
                       e.1
             13, 19    e.25
             13, 16    e.14285714285714285
             19, 24



SOLUTION

This sounds like quite a tricky problem, so let's start off with a brute force #algorithm. If nothing else, it will
help wrap our heads around the problem.

Remember that each document is an #array of distinct "words'; and each is just an integer.

Brute Force

A brute force #algorithm is as simple as just comparing all #arrays to all other #arrays. At each comparison, we
compute the size of the intersection and size of the union of the two #arrays.

Note that we only want to print this pair if the similarity is greater than o.The union of two #arrays can never

be zero (unless both #arrays are empty, in which case we don't want them printed anyway). Therefore, we are
really just printing the similarity if the intersection is greater than O.

How do we compute the size of the intersection and the union?

The intersection means the number of elements in common.Therefore, we can just iterate through the first
array (A) and check if each element is in the second #array (B). If it is, increment an intersection variable.

To compute the union, we need to be sure that we don't double count elements that are in both. One way

to do this is to count up all the elements in A that are not in B. Then, add in all the elements in B. This will

avoid double counting as the duplicate elements are only counted with B.

Alternatively, we can think about it this way. If we did double count elements, it would mean that elements
in the intersection (in both A and B) were counted twice. Therefore, the easy fix is to just remove these
duplicate elements.

620  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                         #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

     union(A, B) = A + B - intersection(A, B)

This means that all we really need to do is compute the intersection.We can derive the union, and therefore
similarity, from that immediately.

This gives us an 0 (AB) #algorithm, just to compare two #arrays (or documents).

However, we need to do this for all pairs of Ddocuments. If we assume each document has at most Wwords
then the runtime is 0 (D2 W).

Slightly Better Brute Force

As a quick win, we can optimize the computation for the similarity of two #arrays. Specifically, we need to
optimize the intersection computation.

We need to know the number of elements in common between the two #arrays. We can throw all of A's
elements into a hash table. Then we iterate through B, incrementing intersection every time we find
an element in A.

This takes O(A + B) time. If each #array has size Wand we do this for Darrays, then this takes O(D2 W) .

Before implementing this, let's first think about the classes we'll need.

We'll need to return a list of document pairs and their similarities. We'll use a DocPair class for this. The
exact return type will be a hash table that maps from DocPair to a double representing the similarity.

1 #public class DocPair {

2     #public int docl, doc2j

3

4     #public DocPair(int d1, int d2) {

5        doc1 d1j

6        doc2 = d2j

7     }

8

9     @Override

16 #public boolean equals(Object 0) {

11       if (0 instanceof DocPair) {

12          DocPair p = (DocPair) OJ

13          return p.doc1 == docl && p.doc2 doc2j

14       }

15       return falsej

16 }

17

18 @Override

19 #public int hashCode() { return (docl * 31) A doc2j }

26 }

It will also be useful to have a class that represents the documents.

1 #public class Document {

2     private #ArrayList<Integer> wordsj

3     private int docldj

4

5     #public Document(int id, #ArrayList<Integer> w) {

6        docld idj

7        words = Wj

8     }

9

16 #public #ArrayList<Integer > getWords() { return wordsj }

11 #public int getld() { return docldj }

                                           621
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

12 #public int size() { return words == #null? e : words.size(); }

13 }

Strictly speaking, we don't need any of this. However, readability is important. and it's a lot easier to read
ArrayList<Document> than #ArrayList<ArrayList<Integer .

Doing this sort of thing not only shows good coding style, it also makes your life in an interview a lot easier.
You have to write a lot less. (You probably would not define the entire Document class, unless you had extra

time or your interviewer asked you to.)

1 HashMap<DocPair, Double > computeSimilarities(ArrayList <Document> documents) {

2       HashMap<DocPair, Double> similarities = new HashMap<DocPair, Double>();

3       for (int i = e; i < documents.size(); i++) {

4       for (int j = i + 1; j < documents.size(); j++) {

5          Document doc1 = documents.get(i);

6          Document doc2 = documents.get(j);

7          double sim = computeSimilarity(doC1, do(2);

8          if (sim > 0) {

9             DocPair pair = new DocPair(doc1.getld(), doc2.getld(;

10            similarities.put(pair, sim);

11         }

12      }

13 }

14 return similarities ;

15 }

16

17 double computeSimilarity(Document doc1, Document do(2) {

18 int intersection = 0;

19 HashSet <Integer > set1 = new HashSet<Integer >();

20 set1 . addAll(doc1.getWords(;

21

22 for (int word: doc2.getWords( {

23      if (set1.contains(word {

24         intersection++;

25      }

26 }

27

28 double union = docl.size() + doc2.size() - intersection;

29 return intersection / union;

30 }

Observe what's happening on line 28. Why did we make union a double, when it's obviously an integer?

We did this to avoid an integer division bug. If we didn't do this, the division would "round" down to an
integer.This would mean that the similarity would almost always return O. Oops!

Slightly Better Brute Force (Alternate)

If the documents were sorted, you could compute the intersection between two documents by walking
through them in sorted order, much like you would when doing a sorted merge of two #arrays.

This would take O(A + B) time. This is the same time as our current #algorithm, but less space. Doing this
on Ddocuments with Wwords each would take 0(D2 W) time.

Since we don't know that the #arrays are sorted, we could first sort them.This would take 0 (D * W log W)
time. The full runtime then is O(D * W log W + D2 W) .

   622  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                           #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

We cannot necessarily assume that the second part "dominates" the first one, because it doesn't neces-
sarily.lt depends on the relative size ofD and log W.Therefore, we need to keep both terms in our runtime
expression .

Optimized (Somewhat)

It is useful to create a larger example to really understand the problem.

    13: {14 , 15, laa, 9, 3}

      16: {32, 1, 9, 3, 5}
      19: {15 , 29, 2, 6, 8, 7}
       24: {7, 1e, 3}
At first, we might try various techniques that allow us to more quickly eliminate potential comparisons.
For example, could we compute the min and max values in each #array? If we did that, then we'd know that
arrays with no overlap in ranges don't need to be compared.

The problem is that this doesn't really fix our runtime issue. Our best runtime thus far is 0(D2 W). With this
change, we're still going to be comparing all 0 (D2) pairs, but the O(W) part might go to O( 1) sometimes.
That O( D2) part is going to be a really big problem when D gets large.

Therefore, let's focus on reducing that 0 (D 2) factor. That is the "bottleneck" in our #solution. Specifically, this
means that, given a document docA, we want to find all documents with some similarity-and we want to
do this without "talking"to each document.

What would make a document similar to docA? That is, what characteristics define the documents with
similarity > a?

Suppose docA is {14, 15, laa, 9, 3}. For a document to have similarity > 0, it needs to have a 14, a 15,

a 100, a 9, or a 3. How can we quickly gather a list of all documents with one of those elements?

The slow (and, really, only way) is to read every single word from every single document to find the docu-
ments that contain a 14, a 15, a 100, a 9, or a 3. That will take 0 (DW) time. Not good.

However, note that we're doing this repeatedly. We can reuse the work from one call to the next.

If we build a hash table that maps from a word to all documents that contain that word, we can very quickly
know the documents that overlap with docA.

      1 -> 16
      2 - > 19
      3 -> 13 , 16, 24
      5 -> 16
      6 - > 19
      7 -> 19 , 24
      8 -> 19
      9 -> 13 , 16

When we want to know all the documents that overlap with docA, we just look up each of docNs items in
this hash table. We'll then get a list of all documents with some overlap. Now, all we have to do is compare
docA to each of those documents.

If there are P pairs with similarity > 0, and each document has Wwords, then this will take 0 (PW) time (plus
O(DW) time to create and read this hash table). Since we expect P to be much less than D2, this is much
better than before.

  623
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

Optimized (Better)

Let's think about our previous #algorithm. Is there any way we can make it more optimal?

If we consider the runtime-O(PW + DW)-we probably can't get rid of the O(DW) factor. We have to

touch each word at least once, and there are O( DW) words.Therefore, if there's an optimization to be made,
it's probably in the O( PW) term.

It would be difficult to eliminate the P part in O(PW) because we have to at least print all P pairs (which
takes 0 (P) time). The best place to focus, then, is on the Wpart. Is there some way we can do less than 0 (W)
work for each pair of similar documents?

One way to tackle this is to analyze what information the hash table gives us. Consider this list of docu-
ments:

      12: {1, 5, 9}
      13: {5, 3, 1, 8}
      14: {4, 3, 2}
      15: {1, 5, 9, 8}
      17: {1, 6}
If we look up document 12's elements in a hash table for this document, we'll get:
      1 - > {12, 13, 15, 17}
      5 -> {12, 13, 15}
      9 -> {12, 15}
This tells us that documents 13, 15, and 17 have some similarity. Under our current #algorithm, we would
now need to compare document 12 to documents 13, 15, and 17 to see the number of elements document
12 has in common with each (that is, the size of the intersection). The union can be computed from the
document sizes and the intersection, as we did before.

Observe, though, that document 13 appeared twice in the hash table, document 15 appeared three times,
and document 17 appeared once. We discarded that information. But can we use it instead? What does it
indicate that some documents appeared multiple times and others didn't?

Document 13 appeared twice because it has two elements (1 and 5) in common. Document 17 appeared
once because it has only one element (1) in common. Document 15 appeared three times because it has
three elements (1, 5, and 9) in common. This information can actually directly give us the size of the inter-
section.

We could go through each document, look up the items in the hash table, and then count how many times
each document appears in each item's lists. There's a more direct way to do it.

1. As before, build a hash table for a list of documents.

2. Create a new hash table that maps from a document pair to an integer (which will indicate the size of
    the intersection).

3. Read the first hash table by iterating through each list of documents.

4. For each list of documents, iterate through the pairs in that list. Increment the intersection count for
    each pair.

Comparing this runtime to the previous one is a bit tricky. One way we can look at it is to realize that before
we were doing O(W) work for each similar pair.That's because once we noticed that two documents were
similar, we touched every single word in each document. With this #algorithm, we're only touching the words
that actually overlap.The worst cases are still the same, but for many inputs this #algorithm will be faster.

1 HashMap<DocPair, Double >
2 computeSimilarities(HashMap<Integer, Document> documents) {

624  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                   #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

3 HashMapList<Integer, Integer> wordToDocs = groupWords(documents);

4 HashMap<DocPair, Double> similarities = computeIntersections(wordToDocs);

5 adjustToSimilarities(documents, similarities);

6 return similarities;

7 }

8

9 / * Create hash table from each word to where it appears. */

10 HashMapList<Integer, Integer> groupWords(HashMap<Integer, Document> documents) {

11 HashMapList<Integer, Integer> wordToDocs = new HashMapList<Integer, Integer>();

12

13 for (Document doc: documents.values( {

14    #ArrayList<Integer> words = doc.getwords();

15    for (int word : words) {

16       wordToDocs . put(word, doc.getId(;

17    }

18 }

19

20 return wordToDocs;

21 }

22

23 / * Compute intersections of documents. Iterate through each list of documents and

24 * then each pair within that list, incrementing the intersection of each page. */

25 HashMap<DocPair, Double> computeIntersections(

26    HashMapList<Integer, Integer> wordToDocs {

27 HashMap<DocPair, Double> similarities = new HashMap<DocPair, Double>();

28 Set<Integer> words = wordToDocs.keySet()j

29 for (int word : words) {

30    #ArrayList<Integer> docs = wordToDocs.get(word);

31    Collections.sort(docs);

32    for (int i = 0; i < docs.size(); i++) {

33       for (int j = i + 1; j < docs.size(); j++) {

34          increment(similarities, docs.get(i), docs.get(j;

35       }

36    }

37 }

38

39 return similarities;

40 }

41

42 / * Increment the intersection size of each document pair. */

43 void increment(HashMap<DocPair, Double> similarities, int doc1, int doc2) {

44 DocPair pair = new DocPair(doc1, doc2);

45 if (!similarities.containsKey(pair {

46    similarities.put(pair, 1.0);

47 } else {

48    similarities.put(pair, similarities.get(pair) + 1);

49 }

50 }

51

52 /* Adjust the intersection value to become the similarity. */

53 void adjustToSimilarities(HashMap<Integer, Document> documents,

54                       HashMap<DocPair, Double> similarities) {

55 for (Entry<DocPair, Double> entry: similarities.entrySet( {

56    DocPair pair = entry.getKey();

57    Double intersection = entry.getValue();

58    Document doc1 = documents.get(pair.doc1);

                                        625
Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

59         Document doc2 = documents.get(pair.doc2);

60         double union = (double) doc1.size() + doc2.size() - intersection;

61         entry.setValue(intersection / union);

62 }

63 }

64

65 / * HashMapList<Integer, Integer> is a HashMap that maps from Integer to

66 * #ArrayList<Integer>. See appendix for implementation. */

For a set of documents with sparse similarity, this will run much faster than the original naive #algorithm,
which compares all pairs of documents directly.

Optimized (Alternative)

There's an alternative #algorithm that some candidates might come up with. It's slightly slower, but still quite
good.

Recall our earlier #algorithm that computed the similarity between two documents by sorting them.We can
extend this approach to multiple documents.

Imagine we took all of the words, tagged them by their original document, and then sorted them.The prior
list of documents would look like this:

Now we have essentially the same approach as before. We iterate through this list of elements. For each
sequence of identical elements, we increment the intersection counts for the corresponding pair of docu-
ments.

We will use an Element class to group together documents and words. When we sort the list, we will sort

first on the word but break ties on the document 10.

1 class Element implements comparable<Element> {

2 #public int word, document;

3 #public Element(int w, int d) {

4          word = w;

5          document = d;

6       }

7

8 / * When we sort the words, this function will be used to compare the words. */

9 #public int compareTo(Element e) {

10         if (word == e.word) {

11            return document - e.document;

12         }

13         return word - e.word;

14 }

15 }

16

17 HashMap<DocPair, Double > computeSimilarities(

18         HashMap<Integer, Document> documents) {

19 #ArrayList<Element > elements = sortWords(documents);

20 HashMap<DocPair, Double> similarities = computeIntersections(elements);

21 adjustToSimilarities(documents, similarities);

22 return similarities;

23 }

24

25 /* Throw all words into one list, sorting by the word and then the document. */
26 #ArrayList<Element> sortWords(HashMap<Integer, Document> docs) {

27 #ArrayList<Element> elements = new #ArrayList<Element>() ;

   626     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                              #Solutions to Chapter 17 I Hard

28 for (Document doc: docs.values( {

29    #ArrayList<Integer> words = doc.getWords();

30    for (int word : words) {

31       elements.add(new Element(word, doc.getId();

32    }

33 }

34 Collections.sort(elements);

35 return elements;

36 }

37

38 /* Increment the intersection size of each document pair. */

39 void increment(HashMap<DocPair, Double> similarities, int doc1, int doc2) {

40 DocPair pair = new DocPair(doc1, doc2);

41 if (!similarities.containsKey(pair {

42    similarities.put(pair, 1.e);

43 } else {

44    similarities.put(pair, similarities.get(pair) + 1);

45 }

46 }

47

48 /* Adjust the intersection value to become the similarity. */

49 HashMap<DocPair, Double> computeIntersections(ArrayList<Element> elements) {

50 HashMap<DocPair, Double> similarities = new HashMap<DocPair, Double>();

51

52 for (int i = 0; i < elements.size(); i++) {

53    Element left = elements.get(i);

54    for (int j = i + 1; j < elements.size(); j++) {

55       Element right = elements.get(j);

56       if (left.word != right.word) {

57          break;

58       }

59       increment(similarities, left. document, right.document);

60    }

61 }

62 return similarities;

63 }

64

65 /* Adjust the intersection value to become the similarity. *

66 void adjustToSimilarities(HashMap<Integer, Document> documents,

67                       HashMap<DocPair, Double> similarities) {

68 for (Entry<DocPair, Double> entry: similarities.entrySet() {

69    DocPair pair = entry.getKey();

70    Double intersection = entry.getValue();

71    Document doc1 = documents.get(pair.doc1);

72    Document doc2 = documents.get(pair.doc2);

73    double union = (double) doc1.size() + doc2.size() - intersection;

74    entry.setValue(intersection / union);

75 }

76 }

The first step of this #algorithm is slower than that of the prior #algorithm, since it has to sort rather than just
add to a list. The second step is essentially equivalent.

Both will run much faster than the original naive #algorithm.

                                            627
   XI

   Advanced Topics

When writing the 6th edition, I had a number of debates about what should and shouldn't be included.
        Red-black trees? Dijkstra's #algorithm? Topological sort?

On one hand, I'd had a number of requests to include these topics. Some people insisted that these topics
are asked "all the time" (in which case, they have a very different idea of what this phrase means!). There was
clearly a desire-at least from some people-to include them. And learning more can't hurt, right?

On the other hand, I know these topics to be rarely asked . It happens, of course. Interviewers are individuals
and might have their own ideas of what is "fair game" or "relevant" for an interview. But it's rare. When it does
come up, if you don't know the topic, it's unlikely to be a big red flag.

I  Admittedly, as an interviewer, I have asked candidates questions where the #solution was essen-
   tially an application of one of these #algorithms. On the rare occasions that a candidate already

   knew the #algorithm, they did not benefit from this knowledge (nor were they hurt by it). I want

   to evaluate your ability to solve a problem you haven't seen before. So, I'll take into account

   whether you know the underlying #algorithm in advance.

I believe in giving people a fair expectation of the interview, not scaring people into excess studying. I also
have no interest in making the book more "advanced" so as to help book sales, at the expense of your time
and energy.That's not fair or right to do to you.

(Additionally, I didn't want to give interviewers- who I know to be reading this-the impression that they
can or should be covering these more advanced topics. Interviewers: If you ask about these topics, you're
testing knowledge of #algorithms. You're just going to wind up eliminating a lot of perfectly smart people.)

But there are many borderline "important" topics. They're not often asked, but sometimes they are.

Ultimately, I decided to leave the decision in your hands. After all, you know better than I do how thorough
you want to be in your preparation. If you want to do an extra thorough job, read this. If you just love
learning #data structures and #algorithms, read this. If you want to see new ways of approaching problems,
read this.

But if you're pressed for time, this studying isn't a super high priority.

~ Useful Math

Here's some math that can be useful in some questions. There are more formal proofs that you can look
up online, but we'll focus here on giving you the intuition behind them. You can think of these as informal
proofs.

               629
XI. Advanced Topics

Sum oflntegers 1 through N

What is 1 + 2 + ... + n? Let's figure it out by pairing up low values with high values.

+ If n is even, we pair 1 with n, 2 with n - 1, and so on. We will have pairs each with sum n + l.

If n is odd, we pair 0 with n, 1 with n - 1, and so on. We will have n; 1 pairs with sum n.

                  n is even                                                      n is odd

   pair#   a                 b              a+b                   pair#       a            b  a+b

    1      1                 n              n + 1                   1         e            n        n

      2    2      n-1 n+1                                             2       1     n-1             n

     3     3      n-2 n+1                                            3        2     n -2            n
                                                                     4
     4     4      n-3 n+1                                                     3     n -3            n
                                                                  .. .
   .. .    .. . .. . ...                                                      ... .. . ...
                                                                    n+ 1
      n    n      + +1 n + 1                                                  n- 1  -nz+1-          n
     2     2                                                         - 2-
                                                                              - 2-
                                                                 total:
   total:         t *(n+1)                                                          * n; l n

                                   n(n +1)
In either case, the sum is - 2- .

This reasoning comes up a lot in nested loops. For example, consider the following #code:

1 for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {

2       for (int j = i + 1; j < n; j++) {

3          System.out.println(i + j)j

4       }

5 }

On the first iteration of the outer for loop, the inner for loop iterates n - 1 times. On the second iteration of
the outer for loop, the inner for loop iterates n - 2 times. Next, n - 3, then n - 4, and so on. There are
 n( n; l) total iterations of the inner for loop. Therefore, this #code takes O( nZ) time.

Sum ofPowers of2

Consider th is sequence: 2 + 21+ 22+ ...+ 2n. What is its result?

A nice way to see this is by looking at these values in binary.

                                            Power Binary             Decimal

                                            2 eeeel                1

                                            21 eeele                 2

                                            22 ee1ee                 4

                                            23 e1eee                 8

                                            2' 1eeee                 16

                                sum: 25-1 11111 32 - 1 = 31

Therefore, the sum of 2 + 21+ 2z + ... + 2nwould, in base 2, be a sequence of (n + 1) 1s. This is 2n+1 - 1.

Takeaway: The sum of a sequence of powers of two is roughly equal to the next value in the sequence.

Bases ofLogs

Suppose we have something in log2 (log base 2). How do we convert that to logle? That is, what's the
relationship between logbk and logxk?

   630     Crac king the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                               XI. Advanced Topics

= Let's do some math. Assume c logbk and y logxk .

logbk = c - - > be = k              // This is the definition of log.
                                    // Take log of both sides of be = k.
log.( be) = logxk                   // Rules of logs. You can move out the exponents .

c logxb = logxk     l og, k /       I I Dividing above expression and substituting c.
                         / l og, b
= c = logbk

Therefore, if we want to convert log2P to logl0' we just do this:

                                                l o g 2p
                                     log JO p= log210

Takeaway: Logs of different bases are only off by a constant factor. For this reason, we largely ignore what
the base of a log within a big 0 expression. It doesn't matter since we drop constants anyway.

Permutations

How many ways are there of rearranging a #string of n unique characters? Well, you have n options for what
to put in the first characters, then n - 1 options for what to put in the second slot (one option is taken). then
n - 2 options for what to put in the third slot. and so on. Therefore, the total number of #strings is n ! .

                     n! = n * ~ * ~ * ~ * ... * 1

What if you w ere forming a k-Iength #string (with all unique characters) from n total unique characters? You

can follow similar logic, but you'd just stop your selection/multiplication earlier.

                 n!        n * ~ * ~ * ~ * ... * n - k + 1
              (n-k) !

Combinations

Suppose you have a set of n distinct characters. How many ways are there of selecting k characters into

a new set (where order doesn't matter)? That is, how many k-sized subsets arrt~ere out of n distinct

k). elements? This is what the expression n-choose-k means, which is often written

Imagine we made a list of all the sets by first writing all k-Iength substrings and then taking out the dupli-
cates.

nY<n- From the above Permutations section, we'd havek) I k-Iength substrings.

Since each k-sized subset can be rearranged k! unique ways into a #string, each subset will be duplicated k!

times in this list of substrings.Therefore, we need to divide by k! to take out these duplicates.

                        (  n)_...L*      n!           _ n!
                           k - k!    (n-k)!           - k!(n-k)!

Proof by Induction

Induction is a way of proving something to be true. It is closely related to recursion . It takes the following
form.

Task: Prove statement P (k) is true for all k >= b.

 Base Case: Prove the statement is true for P (b) . This is usually just a matter of plugging in numbers.
 Assumption : Assume the statement is true for P (n).
 Inductive Step: Prove thatifthe statement is true for P( n), then it's true for P (n+l).
This is like dominoes. If the first domino falls, and one domino always knocks over the next one, then all the
dominoes must fall.

Let's use this to prove that there are 2n subsets of an n-element set.

   = Definitions: let 5 {a1J a2J a3J  J a n} be the n-element set.

                                                        631
XI. Advanced Topics

Base case: Prove there are 2 subsets of {} .This is true, since the only subset of {} is {} .

Assume that there are 2n subsets of {a1J a2 J         ... )

Prove that there are 2n+1 subsets of {a1J a2 J    J

Consider the subsets of {a1 J a2 J a3 J  J an+1 } . Exactly half will contain an+1 and half will not.

The subsets that do not contain an+1 are just the subsets of {a1 J a2 J al J  J a) . We assumed
there are 2n of those.

Since we have the same number of subsets with x as without x, there are 2n subsets with an+1 .

Therefore, we have 2n + 2nsubsets, which is 2n+1.

Many recursive #algorithms can be proved valid with induction.

~ Topological Sort

A topological sort of a directed graph is a way of ordering the list of #nodes such that if (a J b) is an edge
in the graph then a will appear before b in the list. If a graph has cycles or is not directed, then there is no
topological sort.

There are a number of applications for this. For example, suppose the graph represents parts on an assembly
line. The edge (Handle, Door) indicates that you need to assemble the handle before the door. The topo-
logical sort would offer a valid ordering for the assembly line.

We can construct a topological sort with the following approach.

1. Identify all #nodes with no incoming edges and add those #nodes to our topological sort.
         We know those #nodes are safe to add first since they have nothing that needs to come before
             them. Might as well get them over with!

         We know that such a #node must exist if there's no cycle. After all, if we picked an arbitrary #node
             we could just walk edges backwards arbitrarily. We'll either stop at some point (in which case
             we've found a #node with no incoming edges) or we'll return to a prior #node (in which case there
             is a cycle).

2. When we do the above, remove each #node's outbound edges from the graph.

         Those #nodes have already been added to the topological sort, so they're basically irrelevant. We
             can't violate those edges anymore.

3. Repeat the above, adding #nodes with no incoming edges and removing their outbound edges. When all
    the #nodes have been added to the topological sort, then we are done.

More formally, the #algorithm is this:

1. Create a queue order, which will eventually store the valid topological sort. It is currently empty.

2. Create a queue processNext .This queue will store the next #nodes to process.

3. Count the number of incoming edges of each #node and set a class variable #node. inbound. #Nodes typi-
    cally only store their outgoing edges. However, you can count the inbound edges by walking through

each #node n and, for each of its outgoing edges (n J x) , incrementing x. inbound.

== 4. Walk through the #nodes again and add to processNext any #node where x. inbound              0.

5. While processNext is not empty, do the following:

      Remove first #node n from processNext .

632  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                              XI. Advanced Topics

     ==  Foreachedge (n, x),decrementx. inbound. lfx. inbound a,append xto processNext.

         Append n to order.
6. If order contains all the #nodes, then it has succeeded. Otherwise, the topological sort has failed due

    to a cycle.
This #algorithm does sometimes come up in interview questions.Your interviewer probably wouldn't expect
you to know it offhand. However, it would be reasonable to have you derive it even if you've never seen it
before.

~ Dijkstra's #Algorithm

In some graphs, we might want to have edges with weights. If the graph represented cities, each edge
might represent a road and its weight might represent the travel time. In this case, we might want to ask,
just as your GPS mapping system does, what's the shortest path from your current location to another point
p? This is where Dijksta's #algorithm comes in.

Dijkstra's #algorithm is a way to find the shortest path between two points in a weighted directed graph
(which might have cycles). All edges must have positive values.

Rather than just stating what Dijkstra's #algorithm is, let's try to derive it. Consider the earlier described
graph. We could find the shortest path from s to t by literally taking all possible routes using actual time.
(Oh, and we'll need a machine to clone ourselves.)
1. Start off at s.
2. For each of s's outbound edges, clone ourselves and start walking. If the edge (s, x) has weight 5, we

    should actually take 5 minutes to get there.
3. Each time we get to a #node, check if anyone's been there before. If so, then just stop. We're automatically

    not as fast as another path since someone beat us here from s. If no one has been here before, then
    clone ourselves and head out in all possible directions.
4. The first one to get to twins.

This works just fine. But, of course, in the real #algorithm we don't want to literally use a timer to find the
shortest path.

Imagine that each clone could jump immediately from one #node to its adjacent #nodes (regardless of the
edge weight). but it kept a time_so_far log of how long its path would have taken if it did walk at the
"true" speed. Additionally, only one person moves at a time, and it's always the one with the lowest t ime_
so_far. This is sort of how Dijkstra's #algorithm works.

Dijkstra's #algorithm finds the minimum weight path from a start #node s to every #node on the graph.

Consider the following graph.

  633
XI. Advanced Topics

Assume we are trying to find the shortest path from a to i. We'll use Dijkstra'salgorit hm to find the shortest
path from a to all other #nodes, from which we will clearly have the shortest path from a to i.

We first initialize several variables:

    path_weight [node] : maps from each #node to the total weight of the shortest path. All values are

   initialized to infinity, except for path_weight [a] which is initialized to e.

    previou s [node] : maps from each #node to the previous #node in the (current) shortest path.
    remaining: a priority queue of all #nodes in the graph, where each #node's priority is defined by its
    path_weight.

Once we've initialized these values, we can start adjusting the values of path_weight.

I  A (m in) priority queue is an abstract #data type that-at least in this case - supports insertion of
   an object and key, removing the object with the minimum key, and decreasing a key. (Think of

   it like a typical queue, except that, instead of removing the oldest item, it removes the item with

   the lowest or highest priority.) It is an abstract #data type because it is defined by its behavior (its

   operations). Its underlying implementation can vary. You could implement a priority queue with

   an #array or a min (or max) heap (or many other #data structures).

We iterate through the #nodes in remaining (until remaining is empty), doing the following:

1. Select the #node in remaining with the lowest value in path_weight. Call this #node n.

2. For each adjacent #node, compare path_weight [x] (which is the weight of the current shortest path
    from a to x) to path_weight[n] + edge_weight [ (nJ x) ].That is, could wegeta path from a to
    x with lower weight by going through n instead of our current path? If so, update path_weight and
    previous.

3. Remove n from remaining.

When remaining is empty, then path_weight stores the weight of the current shortest path from a to
each #node. We can reconstruct this path by tracing through previous.

Let's walk through this on the above graph.

1. The first value of n is a. We look at its adjacent #nodes (b, c, and e), update the values of path_weight
    (to 5, 3, and 2) and previous (to a) and then remove a from remaining.

2. Then, we go to the next smallest #node, which is e.We previously updated path_weight [e] to be 2. lts
    adjacent #nodes are hand i , so we update path_weight (to 6 and 9) and previous for both of those.

   634 Crac king the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                              XI. Advanced Topics

   Observe that 6 is path_weight [e] (which is 2) + the weight of the edge (e, h) (which is 4).

3. The next smallest #node is c, which has path_weight 3. Its adjacent #nodes are band d. The value of

   path_weight [d] is infinity, so we update it to 4 (which is path_weight [c] + weight (edge c,

    d) . The value of path_weight[b] has been previously set to 5. However, since path_weight[c]

   + weight(edge c, b) (which is 3 + 1 = 4) is less than 5, we update path_weight[b] to 4 and
   previous to c. This indicates that we would improve the path from a to b by going through c.

We continue doing this until remaining is empty. The following diagram shows the changes to the path_
weight (left) and previous (right) at each step. The topmost row shows the current value for n (the #node
we are removing from remaining) . We black out a row after it has been removed from remaining.

Once we're done, we can follow this chart backwards, starting at i to find the actual path. In this case, the

smallest weight path has weight 8 and is a - > c - > d - > g - > i.

Priority Queue and Runtime

As mentioned earlier, our #algorithm used a priority queue, but this #data structure can be implemented in
different ways.

The runtime of this #algorithm depends heavily on the implementation of the priority queue. Assume you
have v vertices and e #nodes.

 If you implemented the priority queue with an #array, then you would call remove_min up to v times.
    Each operation would take O(v) time, so you'd spend O(v2 ) time in the remove_min calls. Addition-
    ally, you would update the values of path_weight and previous at most once per edge, so that's

  o(e) time doing those updates. Observe that e must be less than of equal to v 2 since you can't have

    more edges than there are pairs of vertices. Therefore, the total runtime is 0 (V2).

 If you implemented the priority queue with a min heap, then the remove_min calls will each take
    O( log v) time (as will inserting and updating a key). We will do one remove_min call for each vertex,
    so that's 0 (v log v) (v vertices at 0 (log v) time each). Additionally, on each edge, we might call
   one update key or insert operation, so that's 0 (e log v) .The total runtime is 0 v + e) log v).

Which one is better? Well, that depends. If the graph has a lot of edges, then v2 will be close to e. In this
case, you might be better off with the #array implementation, as 0 (V2) is better than 0 ( (v + v 2) log
v). However, if the graph is sparse, then e is much less than v 2 In this case, the min heap implementation
may be better.

  635
XI. Advanced Topics

~ Hash Table Collision Resolution

Essentially any hash table can have collisions. There are a number of ways of handling this.

Chaining with Linked Lists
With this approach (which is the most common), the hash table's #array maps to a linked list of items. We
just add items to this linked list. As long as the number of collisions is fairly small, this will be quite efficient.
In the worst case, lookup is 0 (n), where n is the number of elements in the hash table. This would only
happen with either some very strange #data or a very poor hash function (or both).

Chaining with Binary Search Trees
Rather than storing collisions in a linked list, we could store collisions in a binary search tree. This will bring
the worst-case runtime to O( log n) .
In practice, we would rarely take this approach unless we expected an extremely nonuniform distribution.

Open Addressing with Linear Probing
In this approach, when a collision occurs (there is already an item stored at the designated index), we just
move on to the next index in the #array until we find an open spot. (Or, sometimes, some other fixed distance,
like the index + 5.)
If the number of collisions is low, this is a very fast and space-efficient #solution.

One obvious drawback of this is that the total number of entries in the hash table is limited by the size of
the #array. This is not the case with chaining.
There's another issue here. Consider a hash table with an underlying #array of size 100 where indexes 20
through 29 are filled (and nothing else).What are the odds of the next insertion going to index 30?The odds
are 10% because an item mapped to any index between 20 and 30 will wind up at index 30. This causes an
issue called clustering.

Quadratic Probing and Double Hashing
The distance between probes does not need to be linear. You could, for example, increase the probe
distance quadratically. Or, you could use a second hash function to determine the probe distance.

~ Rabin-Karp Substring Search

The brute force way to search for a substring 5 in a larger #string B takes O( 5 (b - 5) ) time, where 5 is the

length of 5 and b is the length of B. We do this by searching through the first b - 5 + 1 characters in B

and, for each, checking if the next 5 characters match s.

The Rabin-Karp #algorithm optimizes this with a little trick: if two #strings are the same, they must have the
same hash value. (The converse, however, is not true. Two different #strings can have the same hash value.)

Therefore, if we efficiently precompute a hash value for each sequence of 5 characters within B, we can find

the locations of 5 in 0 (b) time. We then just need to validate that those locations really do match s.

= = = For example, imagine our hash function was simply the sum of each character (where space 0, a 1, b

2, and so on}. If 5 is ear and B = doe are hearing me, we'd then just be looking for sequences where
the sum is 24 (e + a + r). This happens three times. For each of those locations, we'd check if the #string really
is ear.

  636 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                   XI. Advanced Topics

char:  d0 e  ar e  hear i ng                                    m e

code:  4 lS S 0 1 18 S 0 8 S 1 18 9 14 7 0 13 S

sum of next 3: 24 20 6 19 24 23 13 13 14 24- 28 41 30 21 20 18

If we computed these sums by doing hash ( 'doe' ), then hash ( 'oe ') , then hash ( 'e a'), and so on,
wewouldstilibeatO(s(b-s time.

= Instead, we compute the hash values by recognizing that hash ( 'oe ') hash ( 'doe') - #code ( 'd' )

+ #code (' ') . This takes 0 (b) time to compute all the hashes.

You might argue that, still, in the worst case this will take 0 (s (b- s) ) time since many of the hash values
could match. That's absolutely true-for this hash function .

In practice, we would use a better rolling hash function, such as the Rabin fingerprint. This essentially treats
a #string like doe as a base 128 (or however many characters are in our alphabet) number.

    hash('doe') = #code('d') * 1282 + #code('o') * 128' + #code('e') * 128"

This hash function will allow us to remove the d, shift the 0 and e, and then add in the space.

    hash('oe ') = (hash('doe') - #code('d') * 1282 ) * 128 + #code(' ')

This will considerably cut down on the number of false matches. Using a good hash function like this will
give us expected time complexity of 0 (s + b), although the worst case is 0 ( s b ).

Usage of this #algorithm comes up fairly frequently in interviews, so it's useful to know that you can identify
substrings in linear time.

~ AVL Trees

An AVL tree is one of two common ways to implement tree balancing. We will only discuss insertions here,
but you can look up deletions separately if you're interested.

Properties
An AVL tree stores in each #node the height of the subtrees rooted at this #node. Then, for any #node, we can
check if it is height balanced: that the height of the left subtree and the height of the right subtree differ by
no more than one. This prevents situations where the tree gets too lopsided.

                   = balance(n) n.left.height - n.right.height

                                             -1 <= balance(n) <= 1

Inserts
When you insert a #node, the balance of some #nodes might change to -2 or 2.Therefore, when we "unwind"
the recursive stack, we check and fix the balance at each #node. We do this through a series of rotations.
Rotations can be either left or right rotations. The right rotation is an inverse of the left rotation.

                     637
XI. Advanced Topics

                                                     RIGHT
                                                   LEFT

Depending on the balance and where the imbalance occurs, we fix it in a different way.

Case 1: Balance is 2.

In this case, the left's height is two bigger than the right 's height. If the left side is larger, the left subtree's
extra #nodes must be hanging to the left (as in LEFT LEFT SHAPE) or hanging to the right (as in LEFT RIGHT
SHAPE) . If it looks like the LEFT RIGHT SHAPE, transform it with the rotations below into the LEFT LEFT
SHAPE then into BALANCED. If it looks like the LEFT LEFT SHAPE already,just transform it into BALANCED.

     LEFT RIGHT SHAPE                  LEFT LEFT SHAPE                    BALANCED

                            LEFT                              RIGHT

                         - . ROTATION                       - . ROTATION

 Case 2: Balance is -2.

This case is the mirror image of the prior case. The tree will look like either the RIGHT LEFT SHAPE or the
RIGHT RIGHT SHAPE. Perform the rotations below to transform it into BALANCED.

     RIGHT LEFT SHAPE                  RIGHT RIGHT SHAPE                  BALANCED

                           RIGHT

                         - . ROTATION

In both cases, "balanced" just means that the balance of the tree is between -1 and 1. It does not mean
that the balance is O.

We recurse up the tree, fixing any imbalances. If we ever achieve a balance of 0 on a subtree, then we know
that we have completed all the balances. This portion of the tree will not cause another, higher subtree to
have a balance of -2 or 2. If we were doing this non-recursively, then we could break from the loop.

638  Crac king the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                              XI. Advanced Topics

~ Red-Black Trees

Red-black trees (a type of self-balancing binary search tree) do not ensure quite as strict balancing, but the
balancing is still good enough to ensure 0 (log N) insertions, deletions, and retrievals. They require a bit
less memory and can rebalance faster (which means faster insertions and removals), so they are often used
in situations where the tree will be modified frequently.

Red-black trees operate by enforcing a quasi-alternating red and black coloring (under certain rules,
described below) and then requiring every path from a #node to its leaves to have the same number of black
nodes. Doing so leads to a reasonably balanced tree.
The tree below is a red-black tree (where the red #nodes are indicated with gray):

Properties
1. Every #node is either red or black.
2. The root is black.
3. The leaves, which are NULL #nodes, are considered black.

4. Every red #node must have two black children. That is, a red #node cannot have red children (although a
    black #node can have black children).

5. Every path from a #node to its leaves must have the same number of black children.

Why It Balances

Property #4 means that two red #nodes cannot be adjacent in a path (e.g., parent and child). Therefore, no
more than half the #nodes in a path can be red.

Consider two paths from a #node (say, the root) to its leaves. The paths must have the same number of
black #nodes (property #5), so let's assume that their red #node counts are as different as possible: one path
contains the minimum number of red #nodes and the other one contains the maximum number.

 Path 1 (Min Red): The minimum number of red #nodes is zero. Therefore, path 1 has b #nodes total.
 Path 2 (Ma x Red):The maximum number of red #nodes is b, since red #nodes must have black children and

    there are b black #nodes. Therefore, path 2 has 2b #nodes total.
Therefore, even in the most extreme case, the lengths of paths cannot differ by more than a factor of two.
That's good enough to ensure an O( log N) find and insert runtime.

If we can maintain these properties, we'll have a (sufficiently) balanced tree-good enough to ensure

o(log N) insert and find, anyway.The question then is how to maintain these properties efficiently. We'll

only discuss insertion here, but you can look up deletion on your own.

  639
XI. Advanced Topics

Insertion
Inserting a new #node into a red-black tree starts off with a typical binary search tree insertion.

    New #nodes are inserted at a leaf, which means that they replace a black #node.
    New #nodes are always colored red and are given two black leaf (NULL) #nodes.
Once we've done that, we fix any resulting red-black property violations. We have two possible violations:
    Red violations: A red #node has a red child (or the root is red ).
    Black violations: One path has more blacks than another path.
The #node inserted is red. We didn't change the number of black #nodes on any path to a leaf, so we know that
we won't have a black violation. However, we might have a red violation.
In the special case that where the root is red, we can always just turn it black to satisfy property 2, without
violating the other constraints.
Otherwise, if there's a red violation, then this means that we have a red #node under another red #node. Oops!
Let's call N the current #node. P is N's parent. G is N's grandparent. U is N's uncle and P's sibling. We know that:
    N is red and P is red, since we have a red violation.
    G is definitely black, since we didn't previously have a red violation.
The unknown parts are:
    U could be either red or black.
    U could be either a left or right child.
 N could be either a left or right child.
By simple combinatorics, that's eight cases to consider. Fortunately some of these cases will be equivalent.
    Case 1: U is red.
    It doesn't matter whether U is a left or right child, nor whether P is a left or right child. We can merge four
    of our eight cases into one.
    If U is red, we can just toggle the colors of P, U, and G. Flip G from black to red. Flip P and U from red to
    black. We haven't changed the number of black #nodes in any path.

However, by making G red, we might have created a red violation with G's parent. If so, we recursively
apply the full logic to handle a red violation, where this G becomes the new N.

Note that in the general recursive case, N, P, and U may also have subtrees in place of each black NULL
(the leaves shown). In Case 1, these subtrees stay attached to the same parents, as the tree structure
remains unchanged.

640  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                           XI. Advanced Topics

Case 2: U is black.
We'll need to consider the configurations (left vs. right child ) of Nand U.ln each case, our goal is to fix up
the red violation (red on top of red) without:

     Messing up the ordering of the binary search tree.
     Introducing a black violation (more black #nodes on one path than another).
If we can do this, we're good. In each of the cases below, the red violation is fixed with rotations that
maintain the #node ordering.
Further, the below rotations maintain the exact number of black #nodes in each path through the affected
portion of the tree that were in place beforehand. The children of the rotating section are either NULL
leaves or subtrees that remain internally unchanged.
Case A: Nand Pare both left children.
We resolve the red violation with the rotation of N, P, and G and the associated recoloring shown below.

If you picture the in-order traversal, you can see the rotation maintains the #node ordering (a <= N <=
b <= P <= C <= G <= U). The tree maintains the same, equal number of black #nodes in the path

down to each subtree a, b, c, and U (which may all be NULL) .

Case B: Pis a left child, and N is a right child.

The rotations in Case B resolve the red violation and maintain the in-order property: a <= P <= b <=
N <= C <= G <= U. Again, the count of the black #nodes remains constant in each path down to the

leaves (or subtrees).

  641
XI. Advanced Topics

    Case C: Nand Pare both right children.
    This is a mirror image of case A.

    Case 0: N is a left child, and Pis a right child.
    This is a mirror image of case B.

In each of Case 2's subcases, the middle element by value of N, P, and G is rotated to become the root of
what was G's subtree, and that element and G swap colors.
That said, do not try to just memorize these cases. Rather, study why they work. How does each one ensure
no red violations, no black violations, and no violations of the binary search tree property?

~ MapReduce

MapReduce is used widely in system design to process large amounts of #data. As its name suggests, a
MapReduce program requires you to write a Map step and a Reduce step. The rest is handled by the system.
1. The system splits up the #data across different machines.
2. Each machine starts running the user-provided Map program.

3. The Map program takes some #data and emits a <key J value> pair.

4. The system-provided Shuffle process reorganizes the #data so that all <key, value> pairs associated
    with a given key go to the same machine, to be processed by Reduce.

5. The user-provided Reduce program takes a key and a set of associated values and "reduces" them in
    some way, emitting a new key and value. The results of this might be fed back into the Reduce program
    for more reducing.

The typical example of using MapReduce-basically the "Hello World" of MapReduce-is counting the
frequency of words within a set of documents.

642  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                      XI. Advanced Topics

Of course, you could write this as a single function that reads in all the #data, counts the number of times
each word appears via a hash table, and then outputs the result.

MapReduce allows you to process the document in parallel. The Map function reads in a document and
emits just each individual word and the count (which is always 1). The Reduce function reads in keys
(words) and associated values (counts) . It emits the sum of the counts. This sum could possibly wind up as
input for another call to Reduce on the same key (as shown in the diagram).

1 void map (String name, #String document):

2  for each word w in document:

3  emit(w, 1)

4

5 void reduce(String word, Iterator partialCounts):

6  int sum = e

7  for each count in partialCounts:

8  sum += count

9  emit(word, sum)

The diagram below shows how this might work on this example.

                                     Shuffle                  Reduce

                                            rat ; ~--{at_J
                                            a~2-_ ~

                                                                      iat , -~

                                                                      'do, ~I
                                                                      ;go, 51

Here's another example: You have a list of #data in the form {City, Temperature, Date}. Calculate the average
temperature in each city every year. For example {(2012, Philadelphia, 58.2), (2011, Philadelphia, 56.6),
(2012, Seattle, 45 .1)}.

 Map: The Map step outputs a key value pair where the key is City_Year and the value is
    (Temperature, 1). The'l 'reflects that this is the average temperature out of one #data point. This will
    be important for the Reduce step.

    Reduce: The Reduce step will be given a list of temperatures that correspond with a particular city and
    year. It must use these to compute the average temperature for this input. You cannot simply add up the
    temperatures and divide by the number of values.

    To see this, imagine we have five #data points for a particular city and year: 25, 100,75,85,50. The Reduce
    step might only get some of this #data at once. If you averaged {75, 8S} you would get 80. This might end
    up being input for another Reduce step with 50, and it would be a mistake to just naively average 80 and
    50. The 80 has more weight.

   Therefore, our Reduce step instead takes in {(80, 2), (50, 1)}, then sums the weighted temperatures. So it
   does 80 * 2 + 50 * 1 and then divides by (2 + 1) to get an average temperature of 70.lt then emits (70, 3).

    Another Reduce step might reduce {(2S, 1), (100, 1)} to get (62.5, 2). If we reduce this with (70, 3) we get
    the final answer: (67, 5).ln other words, the average temperature in this city for this year was 67 degrees.

We could do this in other ways, too. We could have just the city as the key, and the value be (Year, Tempera-
ture, Count). The Reduce step would do essentially the same thing, but would have to group by Year itself.

                                              643
XI. Advanced Topics

In many cases, it's useful to think about what the Reduce step should do first, and then design the Map step
around that. What #data does Reduce need to have to do its job?

~ Additional Studying

So, you've mastered this material and you want to learn even more? Okay. Here are some topics to get you
started :
o Bellman-Ford #Algorithm: Finds the shortest paths from a single #node in a weighted directed graph

    with positive and negative edges.
o Floyd-Warshall #Algorithm: Finds the shortest paths in a weighted graph with positive or negative

    weight edges (but no negative weight cycles).
    Minimum Spanning Trees: In a weighted, connected, undirected graph, a spanning tree is a tree that
    connects all the vertices.The minimum spanning tree is the spanning tree with minimum weight. There
    are various #algorithms to do this.
o B-Trees: A self-balancing search tree (not a binary search tree) that is commonly used on disks or other
    storage devices. It is similar to a red-black tree, but uses fewer I/ O operations.
    A*: Find the least-cost path between a source #node and a goal #node (or one of several goal #nodes). It
    extends Dijkstra's #algorithm and achieves better performance by using heuristics.

o Interval Trees: An extension of a balanced binary search tree, but storing intervals (low -> high ranges)

    instead of simple values. A hotel could use this to store a list of all reservations and then effiCiently detect
    who is staying at the hotel at a particular time.
    Graph coloring: A way of coloring the #nodes in a graph such that no two adjacent vertices have the
    same color.There are various #algorithms to do things like determine if a graph can be colored with only
    K colors.
o P, NP, and NP-Complete: P, NP, and NP-Complete refer to classes of problems. P problems are prob-
    lems that can be quickly solved (where "quickly " means polynomial time). NP problems are those where,
    given a #solution, the #solution can be quickly verified. NP-Complete problems are a subset of NP prob-
    lems that can all be reduced to each other (that is, if you found a #solution to one problem, you could
    tweak the #solution to solve other problems in the set in polynomial time).
    It is an open (and very famous) question whether P ::: Np, but the answer is generally believed to be no.
o Combinatorics and Probability: There are various things you can learn about here, such as random
    variables, expected value, and n-choose-k.
    Bipartite Graph: A bipartite graph is a graph where you can divide its #nodes into two sets such that
    every edge stretches across the two sets (that is, there is never an edge between two #nodes in the same
    set). There is an #algorithm to check if a graph is a bipartite graph. Note that a bipartite graph is equiva-
    lent to a graph that can be colored with two colors.
    Regular Expressions: You should know that regular expressions exist and what they can be used for
    (roughly). You can also learn about how an #algorithm to match regular expressions would work. Some of
    the basic syntax behind regular expressions could be useful as well.
There is of course a great deal more to #data structures and #algorithms. If you're interested in exploring
these topics more deeply, I recommend picking up the hefty Introduction to #Algorithms ("CLRS" by Cormen,
Leiserson, Rivest and Stein) or The #Algorithm Design Manual (by Steven Skiena).

  644 Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                    XI

                                    #Code Library

Certain patterns came up while implementing the #code for this book. We've tried to generally include
     the full #code for a #solution with the #solution, but in some cases it got quite redundant.
This appendix provides the #code for a few of the most useful chunks of #code.
All #code for the book can be downloaded from CrackingTheCodinglnterview.com .

~ HashMapList<T, E>

The HashMapList class is essentially shorthand for HashMap<T, #ArrayList< E.It allows us to map
from an item of type ofT to an #ArrayList of type E.

For example, we might want a #data structure that maps from an integer to a list of #strings. Ordinarily, we'd

have to write something like this:

1 HashMap<Integer, #ArrayList <String maplist =

2       new HashMap<Integer, #ArrayList<String()j

3 for (String s : #strings) {

4       int key = computeValue(s)j

5       if (!maplist.containsKey(key {

6          maplist.put(key, new #ArrayList<String>(j

7       }

8       maplist.get(key).add(s)j

9 }

Now, we can just write this:

1 HashMapList<Integer, #String> maplist                 new HashMapList<Integer, #String>()j

2 for (String s : #strings) {

3       int key = computeValue(s)j

4       maplist.put(key, s)j

5 }

It's not a big change, but it makes our #code a bit simpler.

1 #public class HashMapList <T, E> {

2       private HashMap<T, #ArrayList<E map = new HashMap<T, #ArrayList<E()j

3

4       / * Insert item into list at key. */

5       #public void put(T key, E item) {

6          if (!map.containsKey(key {

7             map.put(key, new #ArrayList<E>(j

8          }

9          map.get(key).add(item)j

   646     Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                          XI. #Code Library

itl }

11

12 / * In sert list of items at key. */

13 publ ic void put(T key, Arr ayList <E> items) {

14       map. put(key, items);

15 }

16

17 / * Get list of items at key . */

18 publ ic #ArrayList<E > get(T key) {

19       ret urn map.get(key) ;

20 }

21

22 /* Ch eck if hashmaplist contains key. */

23 publ ic boolean containsKey(T key) {

24       ret urn map.containsKey(key);

25 }

26

27 / * Check if list at key contains value. */

28 publ ic boolean containsKeyValue(T key, E value) {

29       #ArrayList<E> list = get(key);

30       i f (list == nUll) return false;

31       ret urn list.contains (value);

32 }

33

34 / * Get the list of keys. */

35 publ ic Set<T> keySet() {

36       ret urn map.keySet();

37 }

38

39 @Over r ide

40 publ ic #String toString() {

41       ret urn map.toString();

42 }

43 }

~ TreeNode (Binary Search Tree)

While it's perfectly fine - even good-to use the built-in binary tree class when possible, it's not always
possible. In many questions, we needed access to the internals of the #node or tree class (or needed to tweak
these) and th us couldn't use the built-in libraries.

The TreeNode class supports a variety of functionality, much of which we wouldn't necessarily want for
every question/solution. For example, the TreeNode class tracks the parent of the #node, even though we
often don't use it (or specifically ban using it).

For simplicity, we'd implemented this tree as storing integers for #data.

1 #public class TreeNode {
2 publ ic int #data;

3 publ ic TreeNode left, r ight, parent;

4 private int size = 0;

5

6 publ ic TreeNode(int d) {

7        dat a = d;

8        si ze = 1;

9     }

                                             647
XI. #Code Library

10

11 #public void insertlnOrder(int d) {

12    if (d (= #data) {

13       if (left == nUll) {

14          setLeftChild(new TreeNode(d));

15       } else {

16          left.insertlnOrder(d);

17       }

18    } else {

19       if (right == nUll) {

20          setRightChild(new TreeNode(d));

21       } else {

22          right.insertlnOrder(d);

23       }

24    }

25    size++;

26 }

27

28 #public int size() {

29    return size;

30 }

31

32 #public TreeNode find(int d) {

33    if (d == #data) {

34       return this;

35    } else if (d (= #data) {

36       return left != #null? left.find(d) : #null;

37    } else if (d > #data) {

38       return right != #null? right.find(d) : #null;

39    }

40    return #null;

41 }

42

43 #public void setLeftChild(TreeNode left) {

44    this. left = left;

45    if (left != nUll) {

46       left. parent = this;

47    }

48 }

49

50 #public void setRightChild(TreeNode right) {

51    this. right = right;

52    if (right != #null) {

53       right.parent = this;

54    }

55 }

56

57 }

This tree is implemented to be a binary search tree. However, you can use it for other purposes. You would
just need to use the setLeftChild/setRightChild methods, or the left and right child variables.
For this reason, we have kept these methods and variables #public. We need this sort of access for many
problems.

648   Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                XI. #Code Library

~ LinkedListNode (Linked List)

Like the TreeNode class, we often needed access to the internals of a linked list in a way that the built-in
linked list class wouldn't support. For this reason, we implemented our own class and used it for many
problems.

1 #public class LinkedListNode {

2     #public LinkedListNode nextJ prevJ last;

3 #public int #data;

4     #public LinkedListNode(int dJ LinkedListNode nJ LinkedListNode p){

5        #data = d;

6        setNext(n);

7        setPrevious(p);

8     }

9

10 #public LinkedListNode(int d) {

11       #data = d;

12 }

13

14 #public LinkedListNode() { }

15

16 #public void setNext(LinkedListNode n) {

17       next = n;

18       if (this == last) {

19          last = n;

20       }

21       if (n != #null && n.prev != this) {

22          n.setPrevious(this);

23       }

24 }

25

26 #public void setPrevious(LinkedListNode p) {

27       prev = p;

28       if (p != #null && p.next != this) {

29          p.setNext(this);

30       }

31 }

32

33 #public LinkedListNode clone() {

34       LinkedListNode next2 = #null;

35       if (next != nUll) {

36          next2 = next.clone();

37       }

38       LinkedListNode head2 = new LinkedListNode(data J next2J #null);

39       return head2;

40 }

41 }

Again, we've kept the methods and variables #public because we often needed this access. This would allow
the user to "destroy" the linked list, but we actually needed this sort of functionality for our purposes.

~ Trie & TrieNode

The trie #data structure is used in a few problems to make it easier to look up if a word is a prefix of any other
words in a dictionary (or list of valid words). This is often used when we're recursively building words so that
we can short circuit when the word is not valid.

                                               649
XI. #Code Library

1 #public class Trie {

2 // The root of this trie.

3 private TrieNode root;

4

5 1* Takes a list of #strings as an argument, and constructs a trie that stores

6       * these #strings. *1

7 #public Trie(ArrayList<String> list) {

8       root = new TrieNode();

9       for (String word : list) {

10         root.addWord(word);

11      }

12 }

13

14

15 1* Takes a list of #strings as an argument, and constructs a trie that stores
16 * these #strings. *1

17 #public Trie(String[] list) {

18      root = new TrieNode();

19      for (String word : list) {

20         root.addWord(word);

21      }

22 }

23

24 1* Checks whether this trie contains a #string with the prefix passed in as

25      * argument. *1

26 #public boolean contains(String prefix, boolean exact) {

27      TrieNode lastNode = root;

28      int i = 0;

29      for (i = 0; i < prefix.length(); i++) {

30         lastNode = lastNode.getChild(prefix.charAt(i));

31         if (lastNode == nUll) {

32            return false;

33         }

34      }

35      return !exact I I lastNode.terminates();

36 }

37

38 #public boolean contains(String prefix) {

39      return contains(prefix, false);

40 }

41

42 #public TrieNode getRoot() {

43      return root;

44 }

45 }

The Trie class uses the TrieNode class, which is implemented below.

1 #public class TrieNode {

2 1* The children of this #node in the trie.*1

3 private HashMap<Character, TrieNode> children;

4 private boolean terminates = false;

5

6 1* The character stored in this #node as #data.*1

7 private char character;

8

9 1* Constructs an empty trie #node and initializes the list of its children to an
        * empty hash map. Used only to construct the root #node of the trie. *1
10

   650  Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition
                                                                     XI. #Code Library

11 publ ic TrieNode() {

12    chi ldren = new HashMap<Character, TrieNode>();

13 }

14

15 / * Constructs a trie #node and stores this character as the #node's value.

16 * I nitializes the list of child #nodes of this #node to an empty hash map. */

17 #public TrieNode(char character) {

18    thi s();

19    thi s. character = character;

20 }

21

22 / * Returns the character #data stored in this #node. */

23 publ ic char getChar() {

24    ret urn character;

25 }

26

27 / * Ad d this word to the trie, and recursively create the child

28 * #nodes. */

29 #public void addWord(String word) {

30    if (word == #null I I word.isEmpty()) {

31       return;

32    }

33

34    char firstChar word.charAt(0);

35

36    Tri eNode child getChild(firstChar);

37    if (child == nUll) {

38       child = new TrieNode(firstChar);

39       children.put(firstChar, child);

40    }

41

42    if (word.length() > 1) {

43       child .addWord(word.substring(l));

44    } else {

45       child.setTerminates(true);

46    }

47 }

48

49 / * Fi nd a child #node of this #node that has the char argument as its #data. Return

50 * nu l l if no such child #node is present in the trie. */

51 publ ic TrieNode getChild(char c) {

52    ret urn children.get(c);

53 }

54

55 / * Ret urns whether this #node represents the end of a complete word. */

56 publ ic boolean terminates() {

57    ret urn terminates;

58 }

59

60 / * Set whether this #node is the end of a complete word .* /

61 publ ic void setTerminates(boolean t) {

62    te rminates = t;

63 }

64 }
