In our personal lives, I think the average American has a sense of right & wrong & we try to do the right thing in life. Our public policies should simply be driven by the same moral compass, the same dictates of conscience, same intention to do right by other people & the world.

Those who lack appreciation for the deep & transformative power of love, who laugh at its fierceness & diminish its importance, yet long for it in the deep dark night of their souls as much as does anyone else. It is their pain, not their intelligence, which guides their mockery.

Whether it’s integrative medicine folded into our healthcare, more compassion at the border, addressing poverty among millions of our citizens, repairing our earth & regenerating our soil, or restoring moral authority to our foreign policy - the solution to every problem is love.

Democracy is genius. Why?  Because it’s a channel for the emergence of group conscience, a place where the best of who we are can come together with the best of who others are to create a wave of collective wisdom.

For every action there’s a reaction - an unalterable law of physics as applicable to behavior as well as to objects. Also, to collective as well as to individual behavior. Deeply irresponsible for a generation to behave in ways that will produce dangerous effects for a later one.

The very idea of “farming” animals is something deeply disconnected from right relationship between humanity & nature. We are here to be proper stewards of both animals & land & we are massively failing at both. Nature will reassert right balance if we do not.

Here I discuss the pillars for a season of repair. They form core principles with which we can course-correct a country that has strayed from its moral and democratic compass.

From a religious perspective, loving one another is the highest commandment. From a spiritual perspective, loving one another is the wisdom of the ages. From a political perspective, loving one another is just the smartest thing to do. Plus, today it’s the only survivable option.

Fear and hate are profound motivators not just personally but also politically. And so is love. There are far more lovers than haters in this country but haters are politicized and convicted and on the move. Lovers among us need to display as much conviction as do those who hate.

Environmental crisis not just political or biological; it’s a moral crisis. Its root was the replacement of an ancient sense of humanity’s partnership with nature, with the idea that nature is here for humanity’s utilitarian purposes. It’s inaccurate, immoral, dangerous & insane.

The biggest problem with our lack of emotional sobriety on the topic of war is that the financial interests of warmongers are served by our denial and distractedness. Who will reap the karma there - just them, or will it not be all of us?

We often talk about less important things because to talk about the most important things would be too emotionally overwhelming. That’s why we don’t having the conversations we need to be having about how to create peace; to do so, we would have to face the harsh realities of war.

From community wraparound services to trauma informed education to nutritional & mental counseling to anti-bullying to violence prevention to mindfulness in schools, we will rescue American children no differently than if they were victims of a natural disaster. Because they are.

There’s  no point trying to assuage pain on the periphery unless we’re willing to challenge the underlying forces that make all the pain in evitable. That’s why my Whole Health Plan regulates the poisonous effects of irresponsible food, chemical, pharma & environmental policies.

A species whose behavior is maladaptive for its survival has one of two choices: to evolve or go extinct. Our collective human behavior has gone from dysfunction to malfunction, both in that we fight too much and that we are actively destroying our own habitat.The choice is ours.

In a world where fear exhibits a constant gravitational pull, positivity is not a given - in politics or anywhere else. An effort to disrupt today’s dysfunctional politics  - with new language, new possibilities and new priorities - is an antidote to fear and a triumph of love.

If you think any of this wonkiness is going to deal with this dark psychic force of the collectivized hatred that this President is bringing up in this country then I'm afraid that the Democrats are going to see some very dark days. #BigTruth #Marianne2020

The way to get over someone having broken your heart is to visualize yourself pouring buckets of divine love all over them.

When a woman is pregnant she can feel a new life gestating within her. We are collectively pregnant now, the consciousness of humanity a womb wherein is forming a new state of being. As with any pregnancy there are uncomfortable moments, but the miracle of new life is on the way.

The Goddess doesn't just dance under the moon on the night of a Solstice. She fiercely protects the children of the earth, and so should we.

Any time any of us move from fear to love, we participate in the morphic field out of which will emerge new possibilities for life on earth.

I was laying awake in my bed worrying about something, when a voice in my heart said, "Marianne, most people in the world do not have beds."

When enough minds are vibrating on a high enough level, then all lower thought forms will fall of their own dead weight.

Your body is merely your space station from whence you beam your love to the universe.Don't just relate to the station; relate to the beams.

Everyone feels on some level like an alien in this world, because we ARE. We come from another realm of consciousness, and long for home.

The most important things in life are not visible to the physical eye. It’s only when we soul-explode beyond the confines of the mortal self, expanding the boundaries of what we think is real, that we begin to glimpse the truth of who we are and why we’re here.

If you want a simple explanation for what's happening in America, watch AVATAR again.

All the films were good but AVATAR has changed the world. He didn't win an Oscar tonight, but James Cameron deserves a Nobel Peace Price

You're a lamp; God is the electricity. You're a faucet; God is the water. You're a human; God is the divine within you. ALLOW the flow.

Peacock feathers are created by peacocks eating thorns. Every thorn you have eaten can become a peacock feather too.

Your mind is like an airplane, and YOU are the pilot: Rise above the clouds. Fly above the turbulence. Seek a smoother ride.

A grey sky is actually a blue sky covered up by grey clouds. A guilty person is actually an innocent soul covered up by mistaken behavior.

Humanity needs a mental shower: we need to wash off all prejudices of the 20th Century and stand naked beneath the waters of eternal Truths.

Yin is feminine, earth; yang is masculine, sky. When God is seen as He, the soul is seen as She. Just archetypes. Spirit impregnates soul.

God is BIG, swine flu SMALL. See every cell of your body filled with divine light. Pour God's love on our immune systems. Truth protects.

Visualize the oil spill plugged. Close your eyes for 5 minutes and see angels coming over it, filling it with sane and sacred thoughts.

Terrible wildfires burning in Sweden. Let’s all pray for/visualize massive rain there. (The mind is that powerful.)

For those too young to remember, trust me: who killed Kennedy is indeed a big deal. A nation, like an individual, is as sick as its secrets.

The world has no idea the power about to rise from the global heart. Haters might have guns, but only lovers have wings.

See a golden chord connect the heart of the Arab and the heart of the Israeli. See it joining them soul to soul. Imagine them one in spirit.

The “end times” means the end of the experience of time as we know it. Wars and rumors of war, yes; but also a time of signs and wonders. Streaks of light. Mental starbursts. The expansion of the heart. Preparation for holiness and timelessness and Love.

The world is chaos. The only antidote to chaos is to cultivate your inner world. You can't exit chaos from consciousness which is chaotic.

Meditation is the most powerful antidote to chaos. Given the chaos in the world today, meditators meditating is one of the greatest ways we can be of service. A resonant field of inner peace is the greatest disruptor of all.

The universe literally loves you.

Calling all goddess types: this a perfect time to do ritualistic nature ceremonies invoking divine alignment between humanity and nature.

Don't be afraid to surrender to the void. The void isn't empty; it's filled with the divine.

Those who passed haven’t passed far, but live on in another dimension. ACIM says the time will come when we’ll see death as nothing more than the taking off of a suit of clothes. Our loved ones are still broadcasting; our need is simply to expand our set to pick up that channel.

Just beneath the surface, this isn't politics it's black magic. Entirely a psychic battle. Use your shield of Virtue and your sword of Truth.

The Phoenix that will rise from these ashes is a politics pointing neither Left nor Right so much as to love & decency & radical good will.

To the consciousness/transformation/meditation/yoga/spirituality/recovery crowd: politics should be part of our awakening now. It's time.

In any moment of negative feeling, stop for 10 to 20 seconds and name all the things you're grateful for. (It stops the psychic bleed.)

Sadness is not a disease. We don't need pharmaceuticals to get through a dark night of the soul.

The psychotherapeutic-psychopharmacological-industrial complex is one of the most threatening forces in America today. Putting our children on psychotherapeutic drugs does more to cause depression than to heal it. Parents awaken.

The spiritual medicine that heals our sadness is not a pill or a shot; it’s an internal process of awakening.

How many public personalities on antidepressants have to hang themselves before the FDA does something, Big Pharma cops to what it knows, and the average person stops falling for this? The tragedies keep compounding. The awakening should begin.

When they go low, go to a higher frequency where they cannot touch you.

When haters step up the hate, the lesson for the rest of us is to step up the love.

With less than two weeks to go until NYE, it's time to say yes to what's right around the corner, and remember the power inside us. Release the fear. Invoke the love. And say: "Enough with the small me." #WednesdayWisdom #2020mindset

We think of each ourselves as flesh and bone, resumes and relationships, clothes and cosmetics. The truth of who we are, why we're here, and where we're going is far more spectacular than any of these worldly things can dictate.

No one is any more or less important than you are. You are everything you need to be.

Getting stuck in mistakes of the past is a hell we create in our own minds.

The present moment is the only time there is. If you think about it, no matter what time it is, it is always now. The gift of the present is the only one you need to focus on.

Break free of your own restraints and allow yourself to manifest everything you could possibly want in your life.

We are all meant to shine. Give the yourself and the world the gift of your light.

If you feel out of alignment, that's because you are. Listen to your internal guidance system and allow the miracles to unfold...⁠

We were all meant to shine. Allow yourself and others the gift of your light. #miracles #love

Love is the essential reality and our purpose on earth.

When a woman rises up in her glory, her energy is magnetic and her sense of possibility contagious YES

Wherever I go, may there be more love and peace because I’m there. May my mind be ever alert to ways I can ease the path for someone. Dear God, please save me from a life lived only for myself.

Magic is when you use your mind to tell the universe what YOU want. Miracles are when you ask the universe what IT wants.
